Title.
Abnormal fronto-limbic engagement in incarcerated stimulant users during moral processing.
Abstract.
Rationale.
Stimulant use is a significant and prevalent problem, particularly in criminal populations. Previous studies found that cocaine and methamphetamine use is related to impairment in identifying emotions and empathy. Stimulant users also have abnormal neural structure and function of the ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC), amygdala, anterior (ACC) and posterior cingulate (PCC), regions implicated in moral decision making. However, no research has studied the neural correlates of stimulant use and explicit moral processing in an incarcerated population.
Objectives.
Here we examine how stimulant use affects sociomoral processing that might contribute to antisocial behavior. We predicted that vmPFC, amygdala, PCC, and ACC would show abnormal neural response during a moral processing task in incarcerated methamphetamine and cocaine users.
Methods.
Incarcerated adult males (N = 211) were scanned with a Mobile MRI system while completing a moral decision making task. Lifetime drug use was assessed. Neural responses during moral processing were compared between users and non-users. The relationship between duration of use and neural function was also examined.
Results.
Incarcerated stimulant users showed less amygdala engagement than non-users during moral processing. Duration of stimulant use was negatively associated with activity in ACC and positively associated with vmPFC response during moral processing.
Conclusions.
These results suggest a dynamic pattern of fronto-limbic moral processing related to stimulant use with deficits in both central motive and cognitive integration elements of biological moral processes theory. This increases our understanding of how drug use relates to moral processing in the brain in an ultra-high risk population.
Substance abuse is a staggering problem, costing the United States up to $11 billion dollars in annual health care costs alone. When considering other factors, such as crime and lost productivity, the cost is more than ten times that. In addition to the societal costs, users of stimulants, such as cocaine and methamphetamine, have significant lifetime prevalence rates, with over 15% of all adults in the United States having used cocaine and upwards of 5% having used methamphetamine. Additionally, 1.5 million people in the United States are current cocaine users while nearly 600,000 are current methamphetamine users, nearly tripling the number of current users since 2011. Meanwhile, nearly 50% of prison inmates report having used cocaine or methamphetamine in their lifetimes. Additionally, 12% report being high on cocaine while committing their crime while an additional 6% of inmates report using methamphetamine at the time of offense.
As might be expected given the relation between stimulant use and crime, research has suggested that stimulant abusers show deficits in several types of socio-affective processes that are related to moral judgement and prosocial behavior. Both active and abstinent stimulant users have difficulty identifying others’ emotions, particularly fear. Additionally, stimulant use is related to diminished empathy and perspective taking, abilities that play an important role in moral decision making.
In addition to behavioral deficits, chronic stimulant users exhibit abnormal neural engagement in both top down and bottom up processes, such as significantly reduced activation compared to controls in the anterior cingulate (ACC), prefrontal cortex, and posterior cingulate (PCC) during response inhibition, prediction, and stress imagery. Abusers of both illicit and non-illicit stimulants also show increased ACC activity during reward cues and less amygdala and prefrontal cortex activations during delay discounting, although another study of intertemporal choice found less activation in methamphetamine users compared to controls in the dorsal ACC. This pattern of both hypo- and hyper-activations in various brain regions is thought to reflect neurocognitive impairments and compensatory cognitive processes, respectively.
Anatomical imaging studies have found that chronic stimulant use is associated with reduced gray matter in the ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC), insula, and temporal cortex. Reductions have also been detected in other frontal regions including anterior and posterior cingulate as well as the amygdala. These patterns of structural abnormalities combine with functional work to suggest a pattern of frontocorticol deficits in chronic methamphetamine users.
Several of the regions implicated in functional and anatomical imaging studies of stimulant use, particularly the vmPFC, amygdala, PCC, and ACC, are consistently engaged during moral judgments in non-clinical populations. During moral processing in the brain, event sequences are stored in the prefrontal cortex and then represented in the vmPFC. Meanwhile, emotional experiences are represented in limbic regions such as the amygdala and PCC. The connections between these regions enable moral decisions, with the ACC playing an important role coordinating reinforcement, affect, and executive action. Additionally, the PCC is engaged during evaluative behavior such as theory of mind, self-reflection, and emotion integration during moral decision-making. Thus, poor decision making, including antisocial behavior, in stimulant users may be related to abnormalities in the neural network responsible for evaluating and making decisions about moral situations. Work with methamphetamine users has found evidence of functional connectivity deficits between frontal and corticolimbic regions leading to risky decision making and impulsivity.
Only two studies to date have directly examined how stimulant users’ brains process morally-salient stimuli. In one study, cocaine users who were participating in an inpatient treatment program, relative to non-cocaine users, showed lower task related activity in the dorsal ACC while evaluating moral dilemmas. Additionally, in previous work we found that abstinent, incarcerated cocaine-users, relative to non-using incarcerated controls, had lower activation in the ACC and vmPFC during implicit moral processing. Implicit moral processing triggers automatic moral processes but does not have moral task demands (e.g., shows a picture of a murder scene and asks if the scene is inside or outside.) However, to our knowledge, no study to date has investigated the neural correlates of explicit (i.e., having moral task demands) moral judgment in incarcerated methamphetamine abusers, despite the fact that many addicts become incarcerated at some point in their lives and 75% of inmates have substance abuse problems, according to epidemiological studies.
Here we examined moral processing in cocaine and methamphetamine chronic users in a large incarcerated sample, allowing us to assess the effects of chronic stimulant use not confounded by acute use and compared to a control group matched on incarceration and background. We hypothesized that incarcerated individuals with a history of chronic stimulant use, compared to incarcerated individuals with no history of regular stimulant use, would show reduced activation in the ACC, PCC, amygdala, and vmPFC when making moral judgments about morally controversial issues. These regions have been found to be significantly engaged in non-incarcerated, non-substance abusing individuals during moral processing and are related to abnormal grey matter volume and function in chronic substance users (see discussion above).. We also predicted that duration of stimulant use, quantified by years of regular cocaine and methamphetamine use, would be related to more pronounced abnormalities in these regions.
Methods.
Participants.
Participants were adult males incarcerated in New Mexico and Wisconsin prisons (N= 211). Inclusion criteria were: age between 18 and 65, IQ of 80 or above, at least 4th grade English reading level, and no history of neurological disorder or history of psychosis in self or first-degree relative. Participants with a history of regular stimulant use (n = 131) were compared to participants with no history of regular stimulant use (n = 80). Characteristics of each group are provided in Table 1.
All participants provided written, informed consent prior to their inclusion in the study and were compensated at an hourly rate comparable to pay rates for work within the facilities. All procedures and materials were approved by the University of New Mexico Institutional Review Board (IRB) and thus have been performed in accordance with the ethical standards of the Declaration of Helsinki.
Assessments.
Substance use was assessed using a modified version of the Addiction Severity Index (ASI-X), in which participants were asked about characteristics of use for a variety of substance classes, including age of first use and years of regular use (defined as three or more times a week). If a participant had any regular use of cocaine or methamphetamine in his lifetime, he was classified as a lifetime stimulant user. This was also used to quantify lifetime years of regular non-stimulant drug and alcohol use. Although methamphetamine and cocaine are distinct substances, both are stimulant class and there is precedent for examining their use together [i.e., ], as well as evidence that the substances have similar trajectories, effects on the brain and outcomes.
In addition to the ASI-X, we collected additional measures to quantify possible confounding factors as well as to evaluate for the exclusion criteria discussed above. Smoking was assessed using the Fagerstrom Test for Nicotine Dependence. IQ was estimated using the Vocabulary and Matrix Reasoning subtests of the Adult Intelligence Scale (WAIS). Because stimulant use is likely to be comorbid with psychopathy, psychopathy and stimulant abuse show overlapping brain regions of decreased structure/function, and psychopathy is higher among incarcerated versus non-incarcerated individuals, psychopathy was assessed in all study participants using the Hare Psychopathy Checklist- Revised (PCL-R). The PCL-R is the most widely used assessment of psychopathy in forensic populations, consisting of a semi-structured interview on topics such as interpersonal style and criminal history. Participants are scored on a scale of 0–40, where higher scores indicate stronger psychopathic traits. Psychiatric histories were assessed with the Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV disorders (SCID) both to evaluate psychotic disorders for exclusion purposes and to evaluate other Axis I disorders. All interviews were conducted by trained research staff.
Moral task.
Participants were shown words and phrases describing moral acts or concepts adapted from a task previously developed and validated by. Fifty stimuli were classified as noncontroversial negative (e.g., murder, slavery), fifty were classified as noncontroversial positive (e.g., charity, kindness), and fifty were classified as controversial (e.g., animal testing, gun control). Controversial stimuli required more processing than noncontroversial stimuli; this was confirmed in our study by an increased response time to the stimuli. Participants were presented with a given stimulus and asked to press one button to indicate they thought the word or phrase was morally wrong and a different button to indicate that they thought the stimuli was morally not wrong. After the button was pressed, a black screen was shown jittered for 1 to 6 seconds. Three runs of the task were administered, each including 50 stimuli evenly divided amongst stimulus types.
MRI data acquisition.
Participants were scanned using the Mind Research Network’s 1.5T Siemens Avanto mobile MRI scanner stationed at correctional facilities. The scans were acquired using an EPI gradient-echo pulse sequence (parameters: repetition time (TR) 2000, echo time (TE) 39 ms, flip angle 75°, FOV 24 x 24 cm, 64 x 64 matrix, 4 mm slice thickness with a 1mm gap, 27 slices). The task was presented using E-Prime software. A T1-weighted scan was collected (parameters: TR 2530, TE 1.64 ms, 3.50ms, 5.36ms, 7.22ms, inversion time = 1100 ms, flip angle 7°, slice thickness = 1.3mm, 256 x 256 matrix), but it was not used in any of the functional MRI post-processing.
Image preprocessing and analyses.
Imaging data were preprocessed with Statistical Parametric Mapping software (SPM). Head motion was corrected using the ArtRepair Toolbox in SPM to identify and remove severe artifacts, defined as time points with signal change greater than 4% of the global mean signal, then INRIAlign to estimate head motion using an algorithm that is insensitive to eye movements and blood oxygenation level dependent (BOLD) activity. We then spatially normalized images to the Montreal Neurological Institute (MNI) template and smoothed with an 8 mm full-width at half-maximum Gaussian smoothing kernel. A high-pass filter removed low-frequency drift below 1/128 Hertz.
We modeled two conditions of interest at the single-subject level using the general linear model (GLM). These conditions were controversial and noncontroversial (including both positive and negative stimuli). We examined the conditions time-locked to participant response. At the group-level, the conditions of interest were compared using a one-sample t-test (controversial > noncontroversial). The main effects of this analysis replicated previous use of this task in healthy controls.
We then used a two sample t-test to compare BOLD responses for this contrast between the lifetime stimulant use group and non-stimulant use group. Additionally, we examined the impact of stimulant use duration on moral processing by regressing total years of regular stimulant use in a separate statistical analysis using only participants in the lifetime stimulant use group. This stimulant use duration measure may in part quantify stimulant use severity.
We did not use years of non-stimulant substance and alcohol use as a covariate in our primary group comparisons because it was significantly different between groups; this means that including it as a covariate would remove variance from the group difference, not the error variance. In order to control for confounding variables in the regression model only, we used years of non-stimulant substance and alcohol use as a covariate in the regression of hemodynamic response by stimulant use duration; we also added age ( significantly related to duration of stimulant use: r = .272, p = .002, two-tailed Pearson, and PCL-R Total score to the model, but did not see substantive differences in the results.
To test our hypotheses, a priori brain regions of interest (ROIs) were examined including the ACC, PCC, amygdala, and vmPFC. Anatomical masks of these regions were generated from Wake Forest University Pick Atlas in SPM. A small-volume correction (SVC) was applied to determine the corrected p-values based on the size of each ROI using family wise error (FWE) rate correction for multiple comparisons. ROIs are represented in Figure 1. Additionally, a whole brain analysis corrected using FWE at p < .05 was conducted to examine areas outside our a priori regions of interest.
In order to understand the contribution of cocaine and methamphetamine use to the overall stimulant use effects, we ran additional analyses with the same contrast, covariates, and ROIs. The analyses were as follows: 1) lifetime cocaine users (n = 118) versus non-cocaine users (n = 93); 2) lifetime methamphetamine users (n = 72) versus non-methamphetamine users (n = 139); 3) duration of lifetime cocaine use (n = 118); and 4) duration of lifetime methamphetamine use (n = 72).