Title.
Striatal Dopaminergic Reward Response Relates to Age of First Drunkenness and Feedback Response in At-Risk Youth.
Abstract.
Dopamine receptor concentrations, primarily in the striatum, are hypothesized to contribute to a developmental imbalance between subcortical and prefrontal control systems in emerging adulthood potentially biasing motivation and increasing risky behaviors. Positron emission tomography (PET) studies have found significant reductions in striatal dopamine D2 receptors, and blunted amphetamine-induced dopamine release, in substance users compared to healthy controls. Extant literature is limited and inconsistent concerning vulnerability associated with having a family history of substance abuse (FH+). Some studies have reported familial liability associated with higher dopamine receptor levels, reduced dopamine response to stimulant challenges and decreased response to oral alcohol. However other reports have failed to find group differences based on family history. We explored the interaction of familial liability and behavioral risk with multi-modal molecular and neural imaging of the dopaminergic system. Forty-four young adult male subjects performed monetary incentive delay tasks during both [11C]raclopride PET and functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) scans. FH+ subjects were identified as Low (n=24) or High Risk (n=9) based on early initiation of drunkenness. FH+ High Risk subjects exhibited heightened striatal dopamine response to monetary reward but did not differ in neural activations compared with FH+ Low Risk subjects and controls with no familial loading (FH-, n=11). Across all subjects, a negative relationship was found between dopamine release and age of first drunkenness and a positive relationship with neural response to reward receipt. These results suggest that in at-risk individuals higher dopamine transmission associated with monetary reward may represent a particularly useful neurobiological phenotype.
The transition from adolescence to adulthood is a particularly unique developmental period. During these years, heavy substance use, bingeing, and the development of problem substance use generally reaches a peak, and then begins to taper off in most, but not in all, individuals. The significant question remains why the majority of youth transition through this period successfully while a subset remains vulnerable to development of substance use disorders. Concurrent to this period of experimentation, dopamine receptor concentrations, primarily in the striatum (including the nucleus accumbens, NAcc) reach peak levels. Critically, the mesolimbic dopamine system is hypothesized to play a role in addiction disorders, with blunted levels of dopamine D2 receptors and dopamine transmission associated with abuse of alcohol as well as stimulants. However, it remains unclear whether the dopamine system in some, potentially vulnerable, individuals is different prior to use of substances, or whether this system is altered by use, or both.
A family history of alcohol use disorder (AUD) is a known risk factor for AUD and other substance use disorders (SUD) with genetic influence accounting for 40-60% of the variance in substance abuse risk. Research has probed the how the dopaminergic system may be involved in familial risk using positron emission tomography (PET). For example, Volkow and colleagues found that non-alcoholic adult members of alcoholic families had higher dopamine D2 receptor availability in the caudate and ventral striatum than non-alcoholic controls, suggesting high levels of receptors might be a protective factor against alcohol problems in these individuals. More recently, enrolled young adults with a family history of substance use disorders (FH+) who reported occasional use of psychostimulants. These subjects had blunted stimulant-induced dopamine release compared to two groups of controls - no familial loading (FH-) subjects that were drug-naïve and FH- subjects who matched the high-risk group on personal drug use though the groups did not differ on baseline receptor availability. Taken together, these studies suggest that for individuals with familial risk, high D2 receptor levels may be associated with resilience while reduced striatal dopamine release following a stimulant challenge might be a biomarker of vulnerability for substance use disorders. However, an earlier stimulant challenge study of nonalcoholic subjects found no effect of family history either on D2 receptor levels or dopamine release. Furthermore, higher dopamine response in response to oral alcohol was recently found to be associated with higher familial loading. Given the contradictions in the literature, additional work is required to understand a link between striatal function and vulnerability.
We sought to further these investigations of risk with an experimental method that behaviorally probes the reward system and has been well-validated during functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), the Monetary Incentive Delay task, (MID, e.g.). Ventral striatal response to this task, measured by blood oxygen level-dependent (BOLD) signal, has been shown to be associated with substance use as well as risk for substance abuse (see recent review by). For example, work from our laboratory has shown that NAcc anticipatory response to reward is related to drinking behaviors in transitioning at-risk youth. In addition, we recently demonstrated that a version of the MID modified for PET induced the activation of striatal dopamine neurotransmission in healthy individuals. Specifically, we found an average 5% reduction in [11C]raclopride binding potential (BPND) associated with reward . For the current study, we probed neural and molecular substrates of reward processing with the MID during both PET and fMRI scanning of young adults with familial risk and control subjects. In the FH+ sample, we identified as high-risk (HR) those subjects who had reported drunkenness by age 15, a behavioral predictor of later dependence diagnosis. We sought to explore the interaction between familial and behavioral risk, with multi-modal neuroimaging, hypothesizing that increased NAcc BOLD response and dopamine transmission would be related to both.
Methods.
Subjects.
Forty-four right-handed, young adult male subjects were recruited from the Michigan Longitudinal Study (MLS), an ongoing prospective community study of families with parental AUD (FH+, n = 33) and contrast families (FH-, n = 11). Parental AUD was based on at least one parent meeting DSM-IV AUD criteria in their lifetime; detailed descriptions regarding the MLS can be found in. Families in which the mother reported drinking during pregnancy or in which the target child exhibited signs of fetal alcohol syndrome were excluded. Exclusionary criteria were: any neurological, acute, uncorrected, or chronic illness; any current or recent (within six months) treatment with centrally active medications including sedative hypnotics; and history of psychosis or schizophrenia in first-degree relatives. The presence of most Axis I psychiatric or developmental disorders was exclusionary. However, externalizing disorders, including conduct disorder, attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), SUD, were not exclusionary as these may lie on a developmental spectrum with AUD risk. Diagnoses were determined using DSM-IV criteria. Participants were told to abstain from alcohol and other drugs (with the exception of nicotine) for 48 hours prior to their appointment and were given a multi-drug 5-panel urine screen before scanning. Because THC metabolites are detectible in urine for more than 48 hours, we relied on self-report regarding abstinence in the 2 days prior to the study if a participant tested positive for marijuana. Report of marijuana use in the prior 48 hours or a positive screen for other drug use was exclusionary. Subject characteristics are summarized in Table 1. Protocols were approved by the Investigational Review Board and the Radioactive Drug Research Committee of the University of Michigan and written informed consent was obtained from all subjects. Urine drug screens were performed immediately before both PET and fMRI sessions.
Substance Use.
Substance use was evaluated with the Drinking and Drug History (DDH) Questionnaire which assesses onset of use, quantity, and frequency of alcohol, marijuana and cigarette consumption; any other drug use; and has questions regarding consequences and problems related to alcohol use. This measure was administered yearly since age 11 and used to derive cumulative substance use by calculating annual use and summing these values through the current age. If data was missing for a year, annual use was calculated as an average of the adjacent years. Abuse or dependence diagnoses were assessed using DSM-IV criteria.
Recent Substance Use.
The Timeline Follow Back questionnaire (TLFB) was used to query daily alcohol, cigarette, and drug use in the 30 days prior to PET scanning. Subjects reported the number of days and quantity (i.e., number of standard drink, cigarettes, joints) of use.
Experimental paradigm - PET.
Each subject underwent a single 90-minute PET scan with [11C]raclopride, a DA radiotracer with affinity for both D2 and D3 receptors during which they performed a modified version of the MID reward task divided into two conditions, reward and control. Trials included an incentive cue, indicating the possibility of reward or the absence of a reward, followed by an anticipation delay. A target then appeared for a variable length of time during which subject used a mouse press response in an attempt to gain or avoid losing money; a schematic of the task is presented in Figure 1. In the reward condition, cues varied in amount (from $0.00–5.00) and valence (win or lose) and a feedback message then informed subjects of the trial outcome. To increase attention and reduce adaptation to the reward in the reward condition over time during the scan, the feedback included increasing positive sounds (i.e. applause, cash register) due to an increasing reward rate over the task. As a control condition, we utilized a control task involving no incentives, where subjects were instructed to respond to a neutral target and feedback was replaced with a message to continue to the next trial without indication of performance. In both conditions, duration of the response target was calculated based on the individual subject's reaction time during a practice session prior to scanning and dynamically adjusted to a mean hit rate of approximately 66%. Each presentation lasted for approximately 30 minutes without interruption with the control condition presented first, beginning at 5 minutes after tracer injection, followed by the reward condition, beginning at 45 minutes post-injection. Participants were paid a fixed rate to participate in the study and additionally received any money they won during the reward condition.
PET imaging.
PET scans were acquired with a Siemens (Knoxville, TN) HR+ scanner in 3-D mode (reconstructed full-width at half maximum resolution, ∼5.5 mm in-plane and 5.0 mm axially). Radiotracer synthesis and image acquisition, coregistration and reconstruction protocols were identical to those used previously. Briefly, images were reconstructed, attenuation and motion corrected, and co-registered to each other. Time points were then decay-corrected during data reconstruction. Approximately 15 millicuries (mCi) was administered for each scan (<40 μg total cold mass for raclopride). Fifty percent of the radiotracer dose was administered as a bolus with the remainder delivered as a continuous infusion which allows for more rapid equilibration across compartments and is achieved within 5 min of radiotracer administration (Watabe et al., 2000). Twenty-eight image frames were acquired over 90 minutes with an increasing duration (30 seconds up to 10 minutes).
PET image processing.
Dynamic images were transformed, on a voxel-by-voxel basis, into two coregistered sets of parametric maps: a tracer transport measure (K1 ratio); and a receptor-related measure at equilibrium BPND, yielding condition level images obtained from 35-45 min (control) and 60-80 min (reward) after tracer administration, using full equilibrium data, with the cerebellum as the non-displaceable reference region. Under these experimental conditions, reductions in in vivo DA D2/D3 receptor availability (BPND) are thought to reflect DA release and neurotransmitter-receptor interactions as [11C]raclopride binds to D2/D3 receptors in the striatum and is sensitive to endogenous striatal DA release . With a priori interest in the NAcc and given the poor spatial discrimination of PET images, 10 mm spherical masks were created centered on the area of peak ventral striatal radioligand displacement, BPND, from the 35-45 minute map for each individual using the MarsBaR region of interest (ROI) toolbox. For all individuals, the peak BPND lay within 10 mm masks previously used as ventral striatum (10, 13, −8; 11, 13, −8). Data from individual control and reward maps were extracted for quantification of regional BPND and calculation of percent change, ΔBPND, for use in statistical analyses. Reductions in ΔBPND from control to active conditions reflect activation of DA D2/D3 neurotransmission. Hereafter we refer to this as incentive/reward-associated DA release although we note that the reward condition included loss trials and, due to the temporal resolution of PET, combines all events (i.e. cue presentation, anticipation, outcome, etc.) into a single metric.
fMRI paradigm.
Brain response during anticipation and feedback of incentive stimuli was probed in a fMRI experiment using a version of the MID task similar to that performed in the PET scan, see Figure 1. Each session involved 72 6-second trials consisting of four events. First, subjects were presented with an incentive cue (2000 ms) of seven possible values (gain of $0.20, $1.00 $5.00; loss of $0.20, $1.00 $5.00; or no change $0). This was followed by a 2000 ms anticipation delay. Next, a target appeared for a variable length of time (200- 300 ms) during which subjects made a button press response in an attempt to gain or avoid losing the money. Subjects were instructed to respond to neutral targets despite the lack of incentive value. A feedback message then informed them of the trial outcome. The incentive trials were presented in a pseudorandom order. The duration of the response target was calculated based on the individual subject's reaction time during a practice session prior to scanning and dynamically adjusted during the task such that overall success rate was ∼60%. Participants were paid fixed participation rates plus additional money won during the task.
fMRI imaging.
Whole-brain BOLD functional images were acquired on a 3.0 Tesla GE Signa scanner (Milwaukee, WI) using T2*-weighted single-shot combined spiral in/out sequences (Glover and Law 2001), parameters: repetition time (TR)=2000 ms, echo time (TE)=30 ms, flip angle (FA)=90°; field-of-view (FOV)=200 mm; matrix size=64×64; slice thickness=4 mm, 29 slices. High-resolution anatomical T1 scans were obtained for spatial normalization. Motion was minimized with foam pads and emphasis on importance of keeping still.
fMRI image processing.
Functional images were reconstructed using an iterative algorithm and motion corrected using statistical parametric mapping (SPM8, Wellcome Institute of Cognitive Neurology, Oxford, UK). All runs for all subjects met the motion inclusion criteria of less than 2 mm translation or 2° rotation. Images were spatially normalized to Montreal Neurological Institute space and spatially smoothed with a 6mm isotropic kernel. A GLM using SPM's canonical hemodynamic response function, modeled all events (cues: win $0.20, win $5.0, lose $0.20, lose $5.0 and neutral $0; anticipation delay for each cue type; positive outcome for each cue type; negative outcome for each cue type) incentive anticipation for each cue type ($0.20 win, $1.00 win, $5.00 win, $0.20 loss, $1.00 loss, $5.00 loss, $0) convolved with the canonical hemodynamic response function. In addition, regressors for six motion parameters and white matter signal intensity were included to reduce residual motion artifacts and capture non-task-related noise. Contrasts for anticipation of monetary gain trials ($0.20, $1.00 and $5.00 combined) versus neutral trials and feedback of positive monetary gain trials versus of negative monetary gain trials were calculated for each individual. These contrasts, referred to as “reward anticipation” and “reward feedback” for the remainder of the text, were for used in second-level one-sample t-test and correlation analyses. Loss contrasts were not further analyzed for this study. Again, with a priori interest in the ventral striatum, left and right NAcc ROI effect sizes were calculated from parameter estimates using the MarsBaR toolbox using anatomical masks as described in previous work.
Statistical Analyses.
All data were analyzed using the Statistical Package of Social Sciences-22 (SPSS-22). Group differences in scan age were assessed using a generalized linear model with three levels for group (FH- Control, FH+ Low Risk, FH+ High Risk). There was an effect of group (F2,43 = 4.11, p = 0.024), which was driven by an older mean age in the FH+ High-Risk group versus the FH- Controls (24.2±2.9 years > 20.6±2.7 years, t = 0.2.875, p = 0.01); therefore scan age was used as a covariate in the remainder of statistical analyses. Data distribution was assessed using the Kolmogorov-Smirnov Z-test; drug use variables did not meet the assumption of normality and were log transformed (after first adding one to each value). Due to high collinearity of reported use of alcohol, tobacco and marijuana, principal component analysis of lifetime cumulative use was performed, resulting in a one factor solution explaining 66.4% of the variance (factor loadings: cumulative drink volume = 0.887, cumulative cigarette smoking days = 0.720, cumulative marijuana smoking days = 0.828). This factor was used as a covariate when assessing group differences in PET and fMRI measures. GLMs were used to assess group differences modeling two levels of the within-subject factor hemisphere (left and right) and three levels of the between-subject factor, group (FH- Control, FH+ Low Risk, FH+ High Risk). With concern that nonspecific effects were part of the structure of influence when including the general consumption factor, these analyses were repeated excluding this factor. However, statistics for GLMs with and without the consumption factor were essentially the same so the latter are not reported in results. Finally, as exploratory analyses, partial correlations, controlling for scan age and the cumulative substance use factor, were used to assess relationships between PET and fMRI data and substance use measures.