Title.
Loss of brain graph network efficiency in alcohol dependence.
Abstract.
Alcohol dependence (AD) is characterized by corticostriatal impairments in individual brain areas such as the striatum. As yet however, complex brain network topology in AD and its association with disease progression are unknown. We applied graph theory to resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging (RS-fMRI) to examine weighted global efficiency and local (clustering coefficient, degree and eigenvector centrality) network topology and the functional role of the striatum in 24 AD patients compared with 20 matched healthy controls (HCs), and their association with dependence characteristics. Graph analyses were performed based on Pearson’s correlations between RS-fMRI time series, while correcting for age, gender and head motion. We found no significant group differences between AD patients and HCs in network topology. Notably, within the patient group, but not in HCs, the whole-brain network showed reduced average cluster coefficient with more severe alcohol use, whereas longer AD duration within the patient group was associated with a global decrease in efficiency, degree and clustering coefficient. Additionally, within four a-priori chosen bilateral striatal nodes, alcohol use severity was associated with lower clustering coefficient in the left caudate. Longer AD duration was associated with reduced clustering coefficient in caudate and putamen, and reduced degree in bilateral caudate, but with increased eigenvector centrality in left posterior putamen. Especially changes in global network topology and clustering coefficient in anterior striatum remained strikingly robust after exploratory variations in network weight. Our results show adverse effects of AD on overall network integration and possibly on striatal efficiency, putatively contributing to the increasing behavioral impairments seen in chronically addicted patients.
INTRODUCTION.
Alcohol dependence (AD) is a psychiatric disorder, characterized by a maladaptive pattern of alcohol use despite adverse consequences. AD and other substance use disorders are regarded as disorders of the brain, and knowledge on the underlying neurobiology has increased tremendously over the past decades (for reviews see e.g.). In this process, functional neuro-imaging techniques have been widely used to show cue-specific or task-specific changes in local brain activity. These studies have shown a central role of the striatum in addiction, as it is highly involved in reward-related behaviors as well as habit formation, constructs that are pivotal in addictive behaviors. A change in striatal involvement over the course of the disorder is also shown, such as increased involvement of posterior putamen during cue-reactivity and instrumental learning in more chronic and more compulsive alcohol dependent subjects. Still, focusing solely on local functional alterations under task-specific circumstances hampers insights into integrated global brain functioning in non-task related circumstances, which contributes to behavioral variability. Moreover, it remains unclear how integration between striatal brain areas into a broader functional network in the brain is related to the duration and severity characteristics of AD.
Recently, in the study of substance use disorders, integration between brain areas has been studied by examining functional connectivity with techniques such as independent or principal component analysis, dynamic causal modeling or a priori defined seed-based connectivity. With these approaches, particular behaviors have been associated with specific brain regions or specialized sub-networks of the brain. However, the brain is increasingly considered a connectome, representing a complex network of highly intercommunicating neural components. Knowledge about the connectome in patients with a substance use disorder is scarce and to our knowledge absent in patients with AD. Considering the high prevalence of AD and the known neurotoxic effects of alcohol, it is essential to further unravel complex brain network abnormalities in AD patients.
In the current study, we fulfill this aim by considering the brain of alcohol dependent patients as a mathematical graph, with nodes as individual units, such as individual brain areas based on an anatomical atlas, and links or edges representing the connections between them. Graph theory is an elegantly simple but wellvetted branch of science for the analysis of complex systems and is valuable for application to the brain network. It offers tools for the study of the complexity of the brain by uncovering system-level characteristics, and provides information on both global integration and local specialization in strongly connected brain areas.
Graph theory analysis is typically applied to the brain network at rest, for example as measured by resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging (RS-fMRI), which does not merely involve specific task-related functions, but provides a comprehensive view of brain functioning by identifying a major whole-brain network that contributes to behavioral variability. In general, RS-fMRI is a reliable and valid technique that shows proficient testretest reliability, meaningfully correlates with the (neuronal) EEG-signal, and is associated with cognitive functioning both in health and disease. The application of graph theory on RS-fMRI has been used in numerous neurological disorders to demonstrate an altered resting-state brain network with reduced integrity and reduced efficiency of disease-related networks (e.g.). The graph theoretical approach is fairly new within the field of psychiatry, but it rapidly gains attention. With regard to addictive disorders, network disruptions such as reduced efficiency were reported in e.g. poly-substance users, gambling, and internet gaming disorder. However, to our knowledge graph theoretical approaches for intrinsic functional network analysis (RS-fMRI data) have hitherto not been applied in humans with AD.
Therefore, we examined the resting-state complex network in AD patients compared with healthy controls (HCs) and associated with illness duration and severity. In addition to studying the global brain network, we specifically considered striatal foci of a priori interest to examine putative network-related abnormalities in these addiction hubs. We hypothesize distinct brain network topology in AD compared with HCs. More importantly, we hypothesize resting-state topological properties to be impaired as a function of AD duration and severity. We expect to see a shift in the role of striatal areas within the whole-brain resting-state network, specifically, a decrease in involvement of striatal areas implicated in goal-directed behavior (e.g. caudate nucleus), and an increase in the prominence of brain areas implicated in habitual drug use (posterior putamen) with longer lasting and/or more severe AD.
MATERIALS AND METHODS.
Participants.
A total of 43 patients with a current (<6 months) DSM-IV-TR diagnosis of AD were recruited from addiction treatment centers in Amsterdam and from the observational multi-center Netherlands Study of Depression and Anxiety (NESDA). NESDA is a large Dutch cohort-study, providing a variety of clinical and demographic information on participants from the general population, primary care and community mental health services, thus allowing for the selection of participants with a current AD diagnosis from a large sample. In addition, 29 age, gender and education matched HCs without any lifetime psychiatric diagnoses (DSM-IV, axis I) were selected from the NESDA cohort and underwent a similar scanning protocol as the AD patients.
All participants were asked to abstain from alcohol at least 24 hours prior to the assessments. At the day of scanning, a urine test was performed to check for unreported use of benzodiazepines and drugs of abuse, and all participants had a confirmed breath alcohol level of 0.00% (Alcoscan Daisy-AL7000). Mean alcohol abstinence duration in AD patients was 2 weeks (Table 1), with a minimum of 24 hours. All AD patients were withdrawal-free. For further details on clinical screening and assessment, see Supporting Information.
Valid and complete resting state as well as structural MRI data were available for 31 AD patients and 21 HC participants. Of this sample, data of eight participants (seven AD and one HC) were excluded from analysis for the following reasons: one HC due to previously unreported concussion and coma during early adulthood; one AD patient due to motion greater than 3 mm during scanning; and six AD patients due to positive urine testing for benzodiazepines on the scanning day. As a result, 24 AD patients and 20 HCs were included in the final analyses. The included and excluded groups did not differ in demographic and clinical characteristics, suggesting the absence of selection bias due to the exclusion criteria.
The VU University Medical Center Ethical Review Board approved this study, and written informed consent according to the Declaration of Helsinki was obtained from all participants prior to the study.
Assessment of alcohol dependence characteristics.
Alcohol use disorder severity was assessed using the sum score of the alcohol use disorder identification test (AUDIT) in both AD patients and HC. The AUDIT consists of 10 items assessing hazardous and harmful alcohol use and dependence symptoms. Every item can be scored from 0 (no problems) to 4 (regular / large problems), resulting in a total score between 0 and 40. A score below 8 indicates no alcohol use problems, a score above 22 indicates risk for dependence. Disease duration in AD patients was calculated as the difference in years between age of AD onset and the last time that alcohol use disorder symptoms contributed to a DSM-IV diagnosis (in the past half year, thus current age), both obtained by the CIDI interview.
RS-fMRI data acquisition.
Magnetic resonance imaging scanning was performed at the Academic Medical Centre in Amsterdam using a 3 T Philips Intera full-Normal MR-system (Philips Medical Systems, Best, the Netherlands) with a phased array SENSE RF 8-channel head coil for radio frequency transmission and reception. Three HCs were scanned under exactly the same circumstances at the Leiden University Medical Center. RS-fMRI was acquired for 8 minutes, while participants were instructed to keep their eyes closed and not fall asleep. Functional blood oxygen level-dependent (BOLD) signals were acquired with a T2*-weighted gradient-echo planar imaging (EPI) sequence and a time-course series of 200 volumes (TR = 2300 ms; TE = 30 ms; matrix size = 96 × 95; voxel size = 2.29 × 2.29 × 3 mm; 35 transverse slices, positioned at an angle of 30° from the anterior-posterior commissure line). Additionally, structural images of the whole brain were acquired using a three-dimensional gradient-echo T1-weighted sequence for anatomical reference with the EPI data (TR = 9 ms; TE = 3.6 ms; matrix size = 256 × 231; voxel size = 1 × 1 × 1 mm; slices = 170).
RS-fMRI data preprocessing.
After quality check and reorientation to the anterior– posterior commissure line in Statistical Parametric Mapping (SPM8; http://www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm), preprocessing of the RS-fMRI data was carried out by using the MATLAB-based toolbox data processing assistant for resting-state fMRI (DPARSF) V2.3, based on SPM8 and the resting-state fMRI data analysis toolkit (http://www.restfmri.net). The first four volumes of every dataset were removed to eliminate non-equilibrium effects of magnetization. The following procedures were applied to the remaining 196 time points: slice timing correction, to compensate for systematic slice-dependent time shifts; realignment towards the first frame to compensate for movement artifacts; co-registration of the EPI scans to the skull-stripped T1-weighted structural scan; segmentation into grey matter (GM), white matter (WM) and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). Eight nuisance signals (WM, CSF signal and six rigid-Normal motion parameters), and the global signal were regressed out to produce a residual BOLD signal. Data were registered into Montreal Neurologic Institute (MNI) standard space and smoothed with a 6 mm full-width at half-maximum (FWHM) kernel. Low band-pass temporal filtering of less than 0.08 Hz was applied. For calculation of head-motion parameters, see Supporting Information.
Anatomical parcellation.
Parcellation of the GM maps was performed to define separate brain regions as nodes for connectivity analysis. This was achieved using the Harvard–Oxford brain atlas based on prior anatomical information. In this atlas, a total of 48 cortical and eight subcortical bilateral structural areas are defined, adding up to 112 nodes. Although global brain network topology composed our main focus, specialized areas in the striatum were of additional a-priori interest. Because the anterior and posterior putamen are assumed to play a distinguishable role, especially in the framework of instrumental conditioning, we subdivided the bilateral putamen in an anterior and posterior part. For this, we used MRIcron & ImCalc implemented in SPM8 to split the putamen in a pre-commissural (anterior, y ≥ 0) and a post-commissural (posterior, y < 0) part. This resulted in 114 areas for final parcellation. Regional mean time series were extracted by averaging the fMRI time series of all voxels in each of these 114 regions.
Graph construction.
The pre-processed and parcellated RS-fMRI data were analyzed using graph theory according to algorithms implemented in the brain connectivity toolbox (http://www.brain-connectivity-toolbox.net) using MATLAB 2012a (The Mathworks Inc., Natick, Massachusetts, USA). A graph is a topological representation of a network consisting of nodes i, connected by links or edges a between two nodes i and j. A weighted undirected graph G was constructed by correlating the connections between all 114 nodes using Pearson’s correlation coefficients, resulting in a network N of 114 nodes and 114 × 113 edges. Edges aij between nodes had a connection weight w that was normalized, such that 0 ≤w≤ 1 for all edges aij. The 40% highest weights were retained for calculation of network characteristics in order to remove negative correlations while keeping the graph fully connected. Negative correlations were discarded, because their underlying neurophysiological mechanism is still insufficiently understood (for a review see). To explore consistency of our results, we additionally performed analyses on graphs based on connection matrices with 30% and 20% highest weights, as well as unweighted graphs, by binarizing the edge weights between nodes after applying an absolute threshold of 0.25. These results are reported in the Supporting Information (Tables S2 and S3).
Graph topological parameters.
We studied both properties of the global complex network as well as graph features of four bilateral striatal nodes (caudate nucleus, nucleus accumbens, posterior-putamen and anterior putamen) within the whole-brain network. We defined several network parameters of interest to describe the main topological characteristics of the entire graph network as well as its striatal nodes. These topographical parameters were derived from the connectivity toolbox as discussed by. For completeness, the equations used to calculate the global and local network topology are given in the Supporting Information methods belonging to this manuscript.
We used global efficiency (GE) as a global measure of integration. GE measures how efficient the network exchanges information at the global level and can be defined as the average inverse shortest path length. Disconnected nodes, defined to have infinite path length, have zero efficiency. The following local network characteristics were investigated for each individual striatal node i, as well as averaged over all 114 nodes to obtain global measures of the network N: clustering coefficient (CC), degree (D) and eigenvector centrality (EC). CC is a measure of segregation, defined as the fraction of triangles (3-node connections) around a node. This is equivalent to the fraction of a node’s neighbors that are also each other’s neighbors. The CC per node (CCi) was averaged over the entire network, to obtain the global CC (CCN). D and EC are measures of centrality. D depicts the number of links connected to a node. The weighted D, also called the strength, is defined as the sum of all neighboring link weights. The mean D of network N (DN) was calculated by averaging the nodal D (Di) and indicates the density or total wiring cost of the entire network. The EC is a measure of the influence of a node in a network. Basically, a node with a high EC has connections with nodes that themselves have a strong connection with many other nodes that are central within the network. It takes into account the entire pattern of the network and is therefore an important addition to the degree centrality. EC is thought to be a more adequate measurement of local centrality than the often used betweenness centrality parameter. Global EC (ECN) was again the global average of nodal EC (ECi), calculated the same way as global CCN and DN.
Statistical analyses.
Demographic and clinical characteristics were analyzed using IBM SPSS Statistics 20 (IBM, New York, NY, USA) using independent samples t-test and non-parametric Kruskal–Wallis for continuous variables, and χ2 tests for categorical variables. Within the AD group, associations were examined using bivariate correlation analyses.
All network characteristics were normally distributed, and thus, parametric tests were used to test for between group differences and within group associations. All individual network characteristics (GE, CC, D and EC), obtained from the correlation matrix, were compared between the AD patients and HCs, and associated with AD duration (in years) and severity (total AUDIT score) within the AD group using multiple linear regressions, and considered significant at P < 0.05 two-sided. Alcohol use was also assessed in HCs using the AUDIT questionnaire, albeit showing significantly lower scores and less variance (i.e. a bottom effect). We additionally examined whether an association between alcohol use (AUDIT score) and network topology as seen in the AD group was specific for the patient sample, or could be generalized to a non-alcoholic population.
Mean head motion, age and gender were added as covariates to all analyses. The significance level for all demographic/clinical and network ANOVA and correlational analyses was set to P < 0.05.
We post hoc tested for the influence of smoking and depression symptoms, as groups differed on these characteristics, for total gray matter volume obtained from the T1 scan after segmentation using Ged Ridgway’s VBM script ‘get_totals.m’ in MATLAB (http://www0.cs.ucl.ac.uk/staff/G.Ridgway/vbm/get_totals.m), and for abstinence duration in the within patient group analyses.