Title.
Selective functional connectivity abnormality of the transition zone of the inferior parietal lobule in schizophrenia.
Abstract.
Structural and functional alterations in the inferior parietal lobule (IPL) in schizophrenia have been frequently reported; however, the IPL connectivity changes in schizophrenia remain largely unknown. Based on heterogeneity of the IPL in structure, connection and function, we hypothesize that the resting-state functional connectivities (rsFCs) of the IPL subregions are differentially affected in schizophrenia. This study included 95 schizophrenia patients and 104 healthy controls. The IPL subregions were defined according to a previous in vivo connection-based parcellation study. We calculated the rsFC of each IPL subregion and compared them between the two groups while controlling for the effects of age, gender, and grey matter volume. Among the six subregions of the left IPL and the five subregions of the right IPL, only the bilateral PFm (a transition zone of the IPL) subregions exhibited abnormal rsFC in schizophrenia. Specifically, the left PFm showed increased rsFC with the bilateral lingual gyri in schizophrenia patients than in healthy controls. The right PFm exhibited increased rsFC with the right lingual gyrus and inferior occipital gyrus, and bilateral mid-cingulate and sensorimotor cortices in schizophrenia patients. These findings suggest a selective rsFC abnormality in the IPL subregions in schizophrenia, characterized by the increased rsFC between the PFm subregion of the IPL and the visual and sensorimotor areas.
Highlights.
Investigation of the subregional-level rsFC changes of the IPL in schizophrenia
The PFm is only IPL subregion with significant rsFC changes in schizophrenia.
Suggesting a selective rsFC abnormality in the IPL subregions in schizophrenia
Introduction.
The resting-state functional connectivity (rsFC) has been proposed as a measure of the coherence of the blood-oxygen-level-dependent (BOLD) signal fluctuations between any two spatially remote brain regions. Prior studies have revealed extensive rsFC abnormalities in schizophrenia; and proposed that schizophrenia may be considered as a disorder of connectivity. However, much previous attention has been paid on the rsFC changes of the prefrontal cortex, hippocampus, thalamus, and cingulate cortex in schizophrenia, leaving the rsFC changes of the inferior parietal lobule (IPL) in schizophrenia remaining largely unknown.
The IPL, also known as Geschwind's territory, involves in sensorimotor integration, semantic processing, mathematical cognition, body image, concept of self, and execution, most of which have been reported to be impaired in schizophrenia. The IPL lesions, especially in dominant hemisphere, can lead to Gerstmann's syndrome, which is characterized by finger agnosia, right-left confusion, acalculia and agraphia. Most of these symptoms are frequently reported to be present in schizophrenia patients (even in early stages) and are named as neurological soft signs. These studies suggest that the IPL is closely associated with schizophrenia.
Structural abnormalities of the IPL in schizophrenia, such as grey matter volume (GMV) reduction and cortical thinning, have been frequently reported. Moreover, these structural impairments have been associated with clinical symptoms and duration of illness. Similarly, the functional abnormalities of the IPL have also been revealed in patients with schizophrenia. On the basis of these findings, we hypothesize that the rsFC of the IPL may be also altered in schizophrenia.
The IPL is a heterogeneous brain region in cytoarchitecture, connection and function. On the basis of regional cytoarchitecture, Brodmann has roughly categorized the IPL into the supramarginal gyrus (SMG, BA40) and the angular gyrus (AG, BA39). A subsequent study further parcellates the IPL into seven subregions: five in the SMG and two in the AG. However, these cytoarchitecture-based parcellation cannot be easily applied into in vivo imaging studies because of misregistration between cytoarchitectonic and imaging data. Based on connection properties derived from diffusion MRI, the IPL has been in vivo subdivided into several subregions similar to the cytoarchitectonic parcellation. Each subregion shows its specific anatomical and functional connectivity patterns. More importantly, these connection-based parcellation schemes can be easily applied to in vivo rsFC studies.
The differential involvement of the IPL in schizophrenia has been shown in GMV analysis. The SMG shows more significant GMV reduction than the remainder part of the IPL in schizophrenia. However, it remains unknown which IPL subregions have rsFC changes in schizophrenia; the information may further improve our understanding on the role of the IPL in schizophrenia. The aim of this study was to identify the specific alterations in the rsFCs of the IPL subregions in schizophrenia.
Materials and methods.
Participants.
A total of 102 schizophrenia patients and 104 healthy subjects were recruited for this study. Diagnoses for patients were confirmed using the Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV. Inclusion criteria were age (16–60 years) and right-handedness. Exclusion criteria included MRI contraindications, poor image quality, presence of a systemic medical illness (i.e., cardiovascular disease, diabetes) or CNS disorder (i.e., stroke, epilepsy), history of head trauma, and substance abuse within the last 3 months or lifetime history of substance abuse or dependence. Additional exclusion criteria for healthy subjects were history of any Axis I or II disorders and a psychotic disorder and first-degree relative with a psychotic disorder. After excluding seven patients with excessive head motion (translational or rotational motion parameters more than 2 mm or 2°), 95 schizophrenia patients and 104 healthy subjects were finally included in further analysis. Clinical symptoms were quantified with the Positive and Negative Syndrome Scale (PANSS). This study was approved by the Medical Research Ethics Committee at Tianjin Medical University General Hospital. All participants were clearly informed about the whole study, and written informed consent was obtained from each participant.
Imaging data acquisition.
MRI was performed using a 3.0-Tesla MR system (Discovery MR750, General Electric, Milwaukee, WI, USA). Tight but comfortable foam padding was used to minimize head motion, and earplugs were used to reduce scanner noise. Sagittal 3D T1-weighted images were acquired by a brain volume sequence with the following parameters: repetition time (TR) = 8.2 ms; echo time (TE) = 3.2 ms; inversion time = 450 ms; flip angle (FA) = 12°; field of view (FOV) = 256 mm × 256 mm; matrix = 256 × 256; slice thickness = 1 mm, no gap; and 188 sagittal slices. The resting-state functional MRI (rs-fMRI) data were acquired using a gradient-echo single-short echo planar imaging sequence with the following parameters: TR/TE = 2000/45 ms; FOV = 220 mm × 220 mm; matrix = 64 × 64; FA = 90°; slice thickness = 4 mm; gap = 0.5 mm; 32 interleaved transverse slices; and 180 volumes. During rs-fMRI scans, all subjects were instructed to keep their eyes closed, to relax and move as little as possible, to think of nothing in particular, and not to fall asleep.
Definition of the IPL subregions.
Here, the naming of the IPL subregions was based on previous studies on cytoarchitecture. The IPL contains PF and PG, where P represents the parietal cortex, PF is the number F subregion of the parietal cortex corresponding to the SMG (BA 40), and PG is the number G subregion of the parietal cortex corresponding to the AG (BA 39). Based on local variations in cytoarchitecture, four additional subregions are identified in PF: PFop, the opercular part of PF; PFt, the part of PF with a thin cortical ribbon; PFm, the magnocellular part of PF; PFcm, the magnocellular and columnar part of PF, and PG is subdivided into PGa and PGp, representing the anterior and posterior parts of PG, respectively. PFm has been named as the transition zone of the IPL because it is located between PF and PG and has common cytoarchitectural features with PF and PG.
The IPL subregions were defined according to a connection-based parcellation study using diffusion MRI data. As shown in Fig. 1, the left IPL was parcellated into six subregions including PFt, PFop, PF + PFcm, PFm, PGa and PGp, whereas the right IPL was parcellated into five subregions, i.e., PFop, PF + PFt, PFm, PGa and PGp. These subregions have shown their specific rsFC patterns, and thus this parcellation scheme is especially suitable for investigating subregion-specific rsFC changes of the IPL in schizophrenia.
rs-fMRI Data preprocessing.
The rs-fMRI data were preprocessed using SPM8. The first 10 volumes for each subject were discarded to allow the signal to reach equilibrium and the participants to adapt to the scanning noise. The remaining volumes were then corrected for the acquisition time delay between slices. On the basis of head motion, seven patients' fMRI data were excluded from further analysis because their translational or rotational motion parameters were greater than 2 mm or 2°. We also calculated framewise displacement (FD), which indexes volume-to-volume changes in head position. Because recent studies have reported that signal spike caused by head motion significantly contaminated the final rs-fMRI results even after regressing out the realignment parameters, we removed spike volumes with the FD > 0.5. Several nuisance covariates (six motion parameters and average BOLD signals of the ventricular and white matter) were regressed out from the data. The datasets were band-pass filtered with a frequency range of 0.01 to 0.08 Hz to reduce low-frequency drift and high-frequency noise. Individual structural images were linearly coregistered to the mean functional image; then, the transformed structural images were segmented into GM, white matter, and cerebrospinal fluid. The GM maps were linearly coregistered to the tissue probability maps in the Montreal Neurological Institute (MNI) space. Finally the motion-corrected functional volumes were spatially normalized to the MNI space using the parameters estimated during linear coregistration. The functional images were resampled into a 3 × 3 × 3 mm3 voxel. After normalization, all datasets were smoothed with a Gaussian kernel of 6 × 6 × 6 mm3 full-width at half maximum.
rsFC Analysis.
For individual datasets, Pearson's correlation coefficients between the mean timecourses of each IPL subregion and timecourses of each voxel in other parts of the brain grey matter were computed and converted to z values using Fisher's r-to-z transformation to improve the normality. For each group, individuals' z values were then entered into a random-effect one-sample t-test in a voxel-wise manner to identify brain regions that showed significant positive correlations with each IPL subregion. Then for each IPL subregion, voxels that showed significant positive correlations with the subregion in any of the two groups were merged into a mask. Then, general linear model was performed within the mask of each IPL subregion to quantitatively compare intergroup differences in rsFC of this IPL subregion while controlling for the effects of age and gender. Because several previous studies reported decreased GMV in the IPL in schizophrenia, we also added the GMV of each subregion as an additional covariate of no interest in the rsFC analyses of the IPL subregions. The detailed description of GMV calculation is shown in the Supplementary materials. Multiple comparisons for these rsFC analyses were corrected using the false discovery rate (FDR) method. Because 11 regions were analyzed, we further controlled for these additional comparisons using a corrected threshold of P < 0.05/11 = 0.0045 (FDR corrected, two-tailed). Moreover, we also used a relatively lenient threshold (FDR corrected, P < 0.01, two-tailed) to reduce type II error.
Validation analysis.
To test whether the resulted rsFC map of each IPL subregion reflects its own unique variance, we recalculated rsFC maps using one first-level model per subject including the preprocessed BOLD timecourses of all IPL subregions. For each hemisphere of each subject, the timecourses of each IPL subregion was orthogonalized with respect to each of the other IPL subregions using the Gram-Schmidt process, to ensure that the timecourses for each IPL subregion reflected its unique variance. And then the orthogonalized timecourses of all IPL subregions in the same hemisphere were considered as independent predictors in one multiple regression model to calculate the functional connectivity (i.e., the beta value of the timecourses) between each IPL subregion and each of other voxels of the whole brain, which simultaneously generated the rsFC maps of all IPL subregions in a subject. Because global signal regression is still controversial, the global signal was not regressed out from the data.
The rsFC map of each IPL subregion in each group was calculated using general linear model based on the rsFC map of this subregion in each subject (FDR corrected, P < 0.01, two-tailed). We defined the positive rsFC map of each IPL subregion of each group derived from multiple first-level models with each investigating one region's connectivity as Mask A and that derived from one first-level model per subject as Mask B. For each IPL subregion of each group, we projected the Mask A onto the Mask B to compare the spatial differences between the group-level rsFC maps of each IPL subregion derived from the two methods. The spatial overlapping ratios of the rsFC maps of each IPL subregion derived from the two methods were calculated by the following equation: Overlapping ratio = (Mask A ∩ Mask B) / (Mask A ∪ Mask B).
Effect of antipsychotic treatments on rsFC changes in schizophrenia.
Although most schizophrenia patients (n = 86) have received antipsychotic treatments, there were drug naïve patients (n = 9). To explore the effect of antipsychotic treatments on rsFC changes in schizophrenia, we extracted rsFCs of the IPL subregions exhibiting significant intergroup difference from each patient and used two sample t-test to compare these rsFCs between the 9 drug-naïve patients and the 86 patients with antipsychotic treatments (P < 0.05, uncorrected).
Correlations with clinical parameters.
To test potential correlations between the rsFCs of the IPL subregions with significant intergroup differences and the clinical variables, we extracted these rsFCs and calculated Spearman's correlation coefficients between these imaging measures and clinical parameters (i.e., PANSS scores, illness duration, and antipsychotic dosage). For these correlation analyses, the threshold of significance was set at P < 0.05, uncorrected.