Title.
Elevated peripheral cytokines characterize a subgroup of people with schizophrenia displaying poor verbal fluency and reduced Broca's area volume.
Abstract.
Previous studies on schizophrenia have detected elevated cytokines in both brain and blood, suggesting neuroinflammation may contribute to the pathophysiology in some cases. We aimed to determine the extent to which elevated peripheral cytokine messenger RNA (mRNA) expression: (1) characterizes a subgroup of people with schizophrenia and (2) shows a relationship to cognition, brain volume and/or symptoms. Forty-three outpatients with schizophrenia or schizoaffective disorder and matched healthy controls were assessed for peripheral cytokine mRNAs (interleukin (IL)-1β, IL-2, IL-6, IL-8 and IL-18), intelligence quotient, memory and verbal fluency, symptom severity and cortical brain volumes integral to language (that is, Broca's and Wernicke's areas). IL-1β mRNA levels were 28% increased in schizophrenia compared with controls (t(82)=2.64, P<0.01). Using a two-step clustering procedure, we identified a subgroup of people displaying relatively elevated cytokine mRNA levels (17/43 people with schizophrenia and 9/42 controls). Individuals with schizophrenia in the elevated cytokine subgroup performed significantly worse than the low-cytokine subgroup on verbal fluency (F(1,40)=15.7, P<0.001). There was a 17% volume reduction of the left pars opercularis (POp) (Broca's area) in patients with elevated cytokines compared with patients with lower cytokines (F(1,29)=9.41, P=0.005). Negative linear relationships between IL-1β mRNA levels and both verbal fluency and left POp volume were found in schizophrenia. This study is among the first to link blood biomarkers of inflammation with both cognitive deficits and brain volume reductions in people with schizophrenia, supporting that those with elevated cytokines represent a neurobiologically meaningful subgroup. These findings raise the possibility that targeted anti-inflammatory treatments may ameliorate cognitive and brain morphological abnormalities in some people with schizophrenia.
Introduction.
Biological abnormalities reported in schizophrenia suggest multiple causative pathways, with no single biological etiology likely to be responsible for all cases. Improving interventions for schizophrenia, therefore, may depend on identifying subgroups of individuals characterized by particular biological abnormalities that can be targeted with specific treatments. Plausible causative pathways may involve early (prenatal) activation of the immune system and/or abnormal immune responses contributing to the ongoing pathophysiology of schizophrenia, which are supported by epidemiological observations, animal models, post-mortem brain research and clinical studies. Group comparisons of peripheral circulating cytokines (signaling peptides of the immune system mediating the inflammation response) between individuals with schizophrenia and controls have consistently identified higher mean levels of interleukin (IL)-6, IL-1β, tumor necrosis factor and other cytokines in schizophrenia and even greater elevations during acute psychosis. We have recently provided evidence of central immune activation with cytokine messenger RNAs (mRNAs) for IL-6, IL-8 and IL-1β upregulated in brain tissue of ~40% of individuals who were chronically ill with schizophrenia. Demonstrating that a proportion of individuals with schizophrenia have abnormal cytokine profiles in blood, similar to what was previously described in post-mortem brain samples, would further support the relevance of inflammation to pathophysiology in a subgroup of those with the disease.
As the characteristics of a distinct subgroup of people with schizophrenia with relatively elevated cytokine levels have yet to be fully described, other diseases may provide insight into the possible clinical presentation. A subgroup of people with Alzheimer's disease display elevated markers of inflammation that have been linked to exaggerated cortical atrophy. A strong association between higher circulating IL-8 levels and poor cognitive function, including verbal fluency measured by the Controlled Oral Word Association Test (COWAT), has also been observed in Alzheimer's disease; and in a separate study, targeted anti-inflammatory therapy with an inhibitor of tumor necrosis factor-alpha produced significant improvements in verbal fluency. Similarly to Alzheimer's disease, individuals with schizophrenia, as a group, are known to show significantly poorer performance on many cognitive domains, including COWAT verbal fluency. Of particular interest with regards to impaired verbal fluency in schizophrenia are structural and functional changes in Broca's and Wernicke's areas, where magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) studies have found abnormal cortical folding and decreased volumes in schizophrenia compared with controls. Whether these cortical abnormalities in schizophrenia are related to either verbal fluency deficits or peripheral immune alterations is unknown.
Although in vivo techniques such as MRI have identified gross brain volumetric changes in schizophrenia, particularly increased size of the lateral ventricles and a decrease in cortical grey matter, these changes have not been definitively linked to any specific pathological process. Identification of the processes underlying the observed volumetric changes is complicated by the lack of replicable histological changes in post-mortem brain from individuals with schizophrenia. However, we have previously shown that a group of individuals with schizophrenia who were characterized by high cytokine mRNAs in post-mortem brain tissue also displayed astrogliosis. Further, several studies have linked structural volumetric changes to some cognitive deficits and symptomatic profiles; however, the relationship to peripheral cytokine elevation is not clear. Thus, based on previous studies individually showing elevated cytokines, cognitive deficits and structural brain abnormalities in schizophrenia, we hypothesized that a higher proportion of people with schizophrenia will display elevated peripheral cytokine mRNA levels and those patients with elevated cytokines will also display cognitive deficits and volumetric brain abnormalities. Cytokine mRNA assays were chosen on the basis of published findings, showing changes in specific cytokines in schizophrenia.
Materials and methods.
Participants.
Forty-three people with a diagnosis of schizophrenia or schizoaffective disorder and 43 age-matched controls were recruited for this study (see Table 1). Patient recruitment was via either clinician or self/family referral following a nationally televised documentary. All patients were living in the community and had been receiving antipsychotic medication for at least 1 year prior to entry in the study. Patient symptom severity scores revealed that the patients displayed mild-to-moderate symptom severity (see Table 1). Diagnostic status was determined by Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV-TR administered by a trained psychiatrist or psychologist and independently confirmed by another research psychiatrist. Antipsychotic medication doses were obtained from the treating physician and converted to mean daily chlorpromazine equivalent dose. Thirty-three patients (and no healthy controls) had their height and weight collected for body mass index (BMI) calculation. For further details and inclusion/exclusion criteria refer to Supplementary Methods. Healthy controls were recruited through advertisements at the University of New South Wales and the local community. The procedures were explained and written informed consent was obtained from participants prior to participation in the study, which was approved by the South Eastern Sydney and Illawara Area Health Services (HREC 07/259) and the University of New South Wales Human Research Ethics Committees (HREC 07121 and HREC 09187).
Blood collection, RNA isolation and complementary DNA synthesis.
Blood was collected from participants in 9 ml ACD-B yellow topped tubes (BD Biosciences, North Ryde, NSW, Australia) before being processed. RNA isolation was according to the TRIZOL method. Four micrograms of total RNA per sample was used in 50 μl reverse transcriptase reactions using the SuperScript III First-Strand Synthesis System to create complementary DNA (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA). Further details can be found in Supplementary Methods: blood collection, RNA isolation and complementary DNA synthesis.
Quantitative PCR.
Transcript levels were measured by quantitative PCR using Applied Biosystems' Prism 7900HT (Foster City, CA, USA) sequence detection system. Four housekeeping genes, TATA binding protein, ubiquitin C, beta-actin and cyclophilin A, with stable expression, were chosen for normalization through calculation of a geometric mean. Probe ID's and M-values (to test for stability of control mRNAs) are provided in Supplementary Methods. Measured mRNAs were quantified using the following probes: IL1β (Hs01555410_m1), IL2 (Hs00174114_m1), IL-6 (Hs00174131_m1), IL-8 (HS00174103_m1) and IL-18 (Hs01038788_m1). Cycling conditions and reaction amounts were as previously described. One control individual did not amplify and was excluded from further analysis.
Cognitive and symptom assessment.
Cognitive function was assessed using the COWAT F-A-S letter test to assess verbal fluency, and Logical Memory I and II from the Wechsler Memory Scale-III to assess immediate and delayed declarative memory. The Letter-Number Sequencing subtest from the Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale–3rd edition was used to assess working memory; picture completion, Digit-Symbol Coding, similarities and arithmetic subtests from the Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale–3rd edition were used as a current intelligence quotient estimate; and the Wechsler Test of Adult Reading was used to estimate premorbid intelligence quotient. The Positive and Negative Syndrome Scale was administered to all patients to obtain measures of positive, negative, general psychopathology and total symptom severity. All assessments were made by psychologists or psychometricians trained in administration and scoring of the assessments. For further details pertaining to cognitive test scoring refer to Supplementary Methods: cognitive assessment.
Structural brain imaging.
Participants were scanned using a 3.0 T Philips Achieva MRI scanner with an 8 channel, bird-cage type, head coil (Neuroscience Research Australia, Randwick, NSW, Australia). A T1-weighted high-resolution anatomical scan was obtained with the following parameters: 180 slices, thickness 1mm, no gap, repetition time: 5.4ms, echo time: 2.4ms, field of view: 256mm. Eight of the 43 participants with schizophrenia elected not to undergo the scanning procedure. Two patients were excluded owing to abnormal MRI findings (that is, developmental asymmetry of the lateral ventricles and partial agenesis of the posterior portions of the corpus callosum). Imaging data from one control subject was not included because their mRNA sample was not amplified by quantitative PCR. This resulted in imaging and cytokine data being available from a subset of people (total of 75), including 33 people with schizophrenia (15 with elevated and 18 with low cytokine levels) and 42 healthy controls (9 with elevated and 33 with low cytokine levels). MRI image processing was performed on a Mac OSX 10.8 workstation using FreeSurfer v5.1.0 (Desikan Atlas) to calculate volumes for specific brain regions of interest. For further details on processing refer to Supplementary Methods: MRI.
Statistical analyses.
Statistical tests were performed using SPSS (version 21, OSX, IBM, Armonk, NY, USA). All quantitative PCR measures were normally distributed either before (IL-8) or after log10 transformation (IL-1β, IL-2, IL-6 and IL-18) with no outliers identified using the Grubb's test. Forward stepwise regressions using age, education and RIN as independent variables were performed to assess relationships of these potentially confounding variables to cytokine mRNA measures. Student's t-tests or analysis of variances (ANCOVAs) were performed on each mRNA measurement to identify diagnostic differences between groups. The elevated cytokine subgroup was defined using a recursive two-step cluster analysis as performed previously on the entire case/control cohort, with missing values (average 3.8 measurements/cytokine) replaced by the expectation maximization algorithm. The optimal clustering model was determined by obtaining the greatest silhouette measure of cohesion and separation (see Supplementary Methods: statistical analysis for additional details of the clustering analysis). Demographics difference between the clusters were tested using t-tests or χ2-tests for continuous and categorical variables, respectively. Cognitive scores were converted into z-scores and used in two-way ANCOVAs, with diagnosis and cytokine group as independent variables and premorbid intelligence quotient estimate (Wechsler Test of Adult Reading) included as a covariate. Specific brain regions of interest were chosen based on the outcome of the cognitive analyses, to target anatomical regions underlying cognitive domains that had demonstrated impairment linked to cytokine levels. Specifically, Broca's area, left pars opercularis (POp) and pars triangularis, and Wernicke's area, supramarginal gyrus (SMG), and their right hemisphere analogs were chosen for analysis based on the presence of a language deficit in the elevated cytokine patient group, as described in the Results section. These structures were assessed using two-way ANCOVAs with brain structure as the dependent variable, diagnosis and elevated/low-cytokine subgroup as independent variables and sex and age as covariates. Linear regression using IL-1β expression levels as the independent variable were performed to assess the strength of the relationships among cytokine expression, COWAT score (covaried for Wechsler Test of Adult Reading) and left hemisphere opercularis volume. A Hochberg-Bonferroni correction for multiple comparisons of both cognitive and imaging results was used on combined ANCOVA results on a post hoc basis. To assess the main effect of elevated/low-cytokine subgroup within the diagnostic group of schizophrenia and to control for potential confounds of antipsychotic exposure, a planned ANCOVA between elevated and low-cytokine patient groups was performed with mean daily chlorpromazine equivalent dose as a covariate.