Title.
Hyper-resting brain entropy within chronic smokers and its moderation by Sex.
Abstract.
Cigarette smoking is a chronic relapsing brain disorder, and remains a premier cause of morbidity and mortality. Functional neuroimaging has been used to assess differences in the mean strength of brain activity in smokers’ brains, however less is known about the temporal dynamics within smokers’ brains. Temporal dynamics is a key feature of a dynamic system such as the brain, and may carry information critical to understanding the brain mechanisms underlying cigarette smoking. We measured the temporal dynamics of brain activity using brain entropy (BEN) mapping and compared BEN between chronic non-deprived smokers and non-smoking controls. Because of the known sex differences in neural and behavioral smoking characteristics, comparisons were also made between males and females. Associations between BEN and smoking related clinical measures were assessed in smokers. Our data showed globally higher BEN in chronic smokers compared to controls. The escalated BEN was associated with more years of smoking in the right limbic area and frontal region. Female nonsmokers showed higher BEN than male nonsmokers in prefrontal cortex, insula, and precuneus, but the BEN sex difference in smokers was less pronounced. These findings suggest that BEN mapping may provide a useful tool for probing brain mechanisms related to smoking.
Cigarette smoking is a chronic relapsing disorder and is a leading cause of preventable disease and premature death. As such, understanding the neural mechanisms underlying nicotine addiction represents a high research priority which may impact future treatment strategies. Over the past few decades, functional neuroimaging has been increasingly used to probe smoking-related brain signatures. While the bulk of such studies focus on brain activations in response to smoking cues or during task performance, recent years have seen increased research interest in resting state brain activity which accounts for most of brain energy consumption.
Most resting state studies in cigarette smoking focused on inter-regional functional connectivity (FC) using the seed-based FC analysis, resting network analysis, or functional connectome (FCM). Using anatomically-defined segments of the cingulate cortex as the seed regions, Hong et al. found that reduced dorsal anterior cingulate cortex (dACC)-striatum FC in 3.5 hours nicotine-deprived smokers correlated with higher nicotine dependence level, while short-term nicotine administration improved the cingulate-neocortical FC. Using the entire hemisphere as the seed region-of-interest, Viswanath and colleagues showed increased inter-hemispheric FC in sated cigarette smokers as compared to controls, which was positively correlated with the number of cigarettes smoked per day. Stoeckel et al. reported lower anterior insula FC in smokers than controls. In, the anterior insula was also used as a seed, and the authors reported reduced FC in ACC, dorso-lateral prefrontal cortex (dlPFC), ventro-medial PFC (vmPFC) and striatum. The dACC FC was demonstrated to be associated with risky decision-making in smokers. Using resting network analysis, Janes and colleagues found greater coupling between left fronto-parietal and medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC) in smokers than in controls. Further, the strength of coupling correlated with the smoking-cue induced brain activity in dorsal striatum. Based on FCM analysis, Lin et al. found that as compared to non-smokers, smokers had lower global but higher local brain network communicating efficiency, consistent with the findings in a recent FCM study in a poly-drug (including cigarette smoking) user population.
Since FC is derived from the coupling between two or more brain regions, one complementary and important research interest is to find a direct measure of regional resting brain activity, which can be subsequently used for brain function or brain deficit localization. Thus far to our knowledge, there was only one such study published in the realm of cigarette smoking, which examined the regional resting state activity using the regional homogeneity (ReHo). As compared to controls, smokers showed decreased ReHo in brain regions associated with the default-mode, frontoparietal attention, and inhibitory control networks, but increased ReHo in regions related to motor planning. ReHo was proposed by Zang et al.. At each voxel, ReHo characterizes the synchronization (Kendall’s tau coefficient) of its neighboring voxels’ rsfMRI time series. What ReHo refers is actually not the characteristics of the resting activity dynamics at each local voxel but rather an inter-voxel coherence within the neighboring voxels.
A novel technique has recently been evaluated by our group and others, referred to as brain entropy (BEN) mapping, which provides a direct means to quantify the regional resting state brain activity dynamics. Entropy is a physical and statistical measure that indicates the irregularity or incoherence, and therefore the status of a dynamic system such as human brain. Using electrophysiological data, BEN has long been used as a global index for assessing different brain states. With fMRI, we have recently demonstrated that regional BEN can be reliably mapped in the normal brain. The normal BEN distributions, however, may be altered in disease conditions, and can be assessed as potential disease biomarkers. Indeed, altered BEN has been demonstrated in aging, schizophrenia, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, and the relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis. Drug addiction including nicotine dependence is known as a disorder of altered brain function brought on by psychoactive substances use, and it is possible that such alterations may manifest as altered BEN, but this has not yet been assessed.
Thus, the purpose of this study was to assess resting BEN in cigarette smokers. We compared BEN between chronic smokers and non-smoking controls and examined the relationship between BEN and smoking related behavioral measures. Because sex differences profoundly affect brain and behavioral endpoints in smokers, as well as treatment response and ability to remain abstinent, differences in BEN between female and male chronic smokers were also explored.
Methods and Materials.
Subjects.
This cross-sectional study included 68 chronic cigarette smoking individuals, hereafter referred to as smokers (35 males, age: 35.3 ± 12.6 (mean ± standard deviation (s.d.)), age ranged from 19 to 58), and 66 individuals who have smoked less than 10 cigarettes throughout their lifetime, hereafter referred to as controls (33 males, age 33.0 ± 8.2 (mean ± s.d.), age ranged from 21 to 51). Detailed demographic information is listed in Table 1. The subjects were recruited from the local community in the West Philadelphia area. There was no significant difference between smokers and controls in age (p = 0.21), or sex (χ2 = 0.03, p = 0.87), or ethnicity (χ2 = 3.99, p = 0.26). All study procedures adhered to the Declaration of Helsinki and were approved by the University of Pennsylvania Institutional Review Board (IRB). All subjects provided written informed IRB-approved consent prior to participating in study procedures.
Smoking behaviors.
The intensity of physical addiction to nicotine was assessed using the Fagerstrom Test for Nicotine Dependence (FTND), which is a six-item, self-report test evaluating the compulsion to use cigarette, quantity of consumption and the dependence. It scores from 0 to 10, with 10 being the most severe.
Exposure to tobacco smoke was assessed using self-reported quantities of cigarettes per day (CPD), years-smoking, and pack-years. The years-smoking measures the duration of smoking history in the form of integer years. It was calculated by subtracting the age at smoking initiation from the age at assessment. Pack-years summarizes the amount of cigarettes a person has smoked over a lifetime, e.g., 1 pack-years is equal to smoking a pack (20 manufactured cigarettes) per day for one year. So the pack-years was calculated as CPD/20 *years-smoking.
For the current smoker group, the FTND score was 4.7 ± 1.6 (mean ± s.d.), indicating moderate dependence on nicotine. The smokers smoked 14.5 ± 6.1 CPD, and had 15.4 ± 11.5 years-smoking (mean ± s.d.). The accumulated pack-years for the smokers was 11.4 ± 9.8 (mean ± s.d.).
Imaging parameters.
Smokers smoked ad lib throughout the study and smoked a cigarette to satiety approximately 20 minutes prior to scanning sessions in order to dissipate nicotine induced vascular effects. All MR images were acquired on a Siemens 3 Tesla Trio whole-body scanner (Erlangen, Germany) at the Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania using an eight-channel array coil. High-resolution T1-weighted images were obtained using a 3D-MPRAGE sequence (TR = 1620 ms, TE = 3 ms, flip angle = 15°, slice thickness = 1.0 mm). rsfMRI images were acquired using a T2*-weighted gradient echo echo-planar-imaging (EPI) sequence with following parameters: TR = 2 s, TE = 30 ms, slice thickness = 3.3 mm, 35 slices, FOV = 220 × 220 mm2, and matrix = 64 × 64. 150 time points were collected for each subject. Subjects were instructed to lie still and keep their eyes open during the scan acquisition.
Data preprocessing.
Data preprocessing was performed with a standard pipeline using FSL and SPM8 (http://www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm/). First, skull stripping was performed using FSL. SPM8-based processing steps were then performed using batch scripts provided within ASLtbx. Briefly, the rsfMRI images were corrected for slice timing and the six directions of head motion (3 translations and 3 rotations). The images were subsequently smoothed with a full width half maximum (FWHM) 6 mm Gaussian kernel and band-pass filtered (0.009–0.1 Hz). CSF and white matter signals, as well as the motion parameters and their derivatives, were included in the model as covariates of no interest.
Each subject’s BEN map was calculated from the preprocessed rsfMRI images using the BENtbx (https://cfn.upenn.edu/~zewang/software.html). Sample entropy was used as the approximate entropy metric. Sample entropy quantifies the temporal irregularity (incoherence) of a time series through calculating the “logarithmic likelihood” that a small segment (with a window length equal to ‘m’) of the data matches with other segments will still match the others if the segment length increases by 1. “match” is defined by a cut-off threshold ‘r’., Based on our previous work, the window length was set to 3 and the cut off threshold was set to 0.6. Denoting the rsfMRI data of one voxel by x = [x1, x2, …, xN], where N is the number of acquisitions, SampEn calculation starts with forming a series of vector sequences, each with m consecutive points extracted from x: ui = [xi, xi+1, …, xi+m − 1], where i = 1…(N−m + 1), and m is the pre-defined window size (3, as stated above). For the purpose of description, we named these vectors as embedded vectors. Using a pre-specified distance threshold r (0.6), the number of embedded vectors uj (J = 1…(N−m), and J≠i) whose distance from uiare less than r is recorded by. The same procedure is repeated for the dimension of m + 1 to get . Then by averaging across all possible vectors, we have
And SampEn is calculated as:
Each subject’s BEN map was first calculated in the native rsfMRI image space, then nonlinearly warped to the Montreal Neurological Institute (MNI) standard space using SPM8 and resampled with a resolution of 2 × 2 × 2 mm3. The name of regions of significance were identified using the Automated Anatomical Labeling (AAL) atlas.
Since BEN is still new in fMRI, we also conducted a standard FC analysis. Seed-based FCs were calculated using the 5 mm-radius sphere seeds published by Power et al.. We chose several seeds located in dACC, posterior cingulate cortex (PCC) and bilateral anterior insula. For each seed, the mean time signal was extracted and correlated with the time signal of all voxels across the brain. The z scores of the correlation maps were calculated and used for group analysis.
Group level analysis.
The following group level analyses were performed. 1) The group level BEN difference between the smokers and the controls was assessed with the massive univariate two-sample t-test implemented in SPM8 using the spatially normalized BEN maps. Only grey matter voxels were considered in this study by using a grey matter mask (created from the grey matter priors provided in SPM8, thresholded with probability value >0.4). The significance level was set to be p < 0.05 (FWE corrected). A cluster threshold of ≥100 voxels was used to remove sporadic voxels. 2) In both the smoker group and the control group, BEN differences between female subjects and male subjects were assessed using the same statistical analysis step as mentioned above. 3) For smokers, we examined the correlation between BEN and each of the smoking behavior scores (i.e. CPD, years-smoking, pack-years, and FTND) using the multiple linear regression model provided in SPM8. Each smoking behavior measure such as years-smoking was entered as the covariate of interest. Age and sex were included as the nuisance variables. The multiple regression was performed for each voxel of the entire brain. A significance level of p < 0.005 (un-corrected) was used in combination with a cluster-wise threshold of cluster extent ≥ 100 voxels. 4) Smokers were divided into two subgroups according to sex and the above BEN vs smoking behavior correlation analysis was performed for each subgroup independently. 5) Group level FC difference between the smokers and controls was assessed using two-sample t-test. Grey matter mask was used and the result images were thresholded with p < 0.005 (un-corrected) and cluster extent of ≥ 100 voxels.