Title.
Regional homogeneity changes between heroin relapse and non-relapse patients under methadone maintenance treatment: a resting-state fMRI study.
Abstract.
Background.
Methadone maintenance treatment (MMT) is recognized as one of the most effective treatments for heroin addiction but its effect is dimmed by the high incidence of heroin relapse. However, underlying neurobiology mechanism of heroin relapse under MMT is still largely unknown. Here, we took advantage of a resting-state fMRI technique by analysis of regional homogeneity (ReHo), and tried to explore the difference of brain function between heroin relapsers and non-relapsers in MMT.
Methods.
Forty MMT patients were included and received a 12-month follow-up. All patients were given baseline resting-state fMRI scans by using a 3.0 T GE Signa Excite HD whole-body MRI system. Monthly self-report and urine test were used to assess heroin relapse or non-relapse. Subjective craving was measured with visual analog scale. The correlation between ReHo and the degree of heroin relapse was analyzed.
Results.
Compared with the non-relapsers, ReHo values were increased in the bilateral medial orbitofrontal cortex, right caudate, and right cerebellum of the heroin relapsers while those in the left parahippocampal gyrus, left middle temporal gyrus, right lingual gyrus, and precuneus were decreased in heroin relapsers. Importantly, altered ReHo in the right caudate were positively correlated with heroin relapse rates or subjective craving response.
Conclusions.
Using the resting-state fMRI technique by analysis of ReHo, we provided the first resting-state fMRI evidence that right caudate may serve as a potential biomarker for heroin relapse prediction and also as a promising target for reducing relapse risk.
Background.
Drug addiction is a kind of chronic cerebral dysfunction. Unlike cocaine and cannabis popular in foreign countries, heroin is popular in China. Compared with cocaine and cannabis, heroin causes more tolerance and addiction. More seriously, once addicted with heroin, it is hard to abstinence. Currently, methadone maintenance treatment (MMT) is a main strategy for the treatment of heroin addiction. However, unfortunately, MMT cannot completely solve the problem of heroin abuse due to the fact that the relapse rate still remained high under MMT. Apart from psychological and social factors, many researchers believed that neurobiological factors were also involved in heroin addiction and relapse.
In recent years, a body of studies have been making the attempt on neural circuits and brain functions in heroin addiction by using resting-state fMRI method. By comparing heroin addicts with healthy controls, researchers revealed a heroin-related organization pattern. For instance, Ma et al. observed the enhanced functional connectivity between the nucleus accumbens and the ventral cingulate cortex, the orbitofrontal cortex (OFC), or the amygdala whereas the decreased functional connectivity between the anterior cingulate and the prefrontal cortex or the OFC was evident in heroin addicts. With the graph theory analysis, Liu et al. found dysfunctional connectivity in the anterior cingulate cortex, amygdala, insula, hippocampus, nucleus accumbens, prefrontal cortex, supplementary motor area, and ventral striatum in chronic heroin users. Therefore, resting-state fMRI method could not only reveal the abnormal baseline function in heroin users at the resting state, but also show the abnormal functional connectivity of two remote areas.
Recently, the regional homogeneity (ReHo) method has been developed to analyse the similarities or coherence of intraregional spontaneous low-frequency (<0.08 Hz) blood oxygenation level-dependent signal fluctuations in voxel-wise analysis across the whole brain. Due to independence of the onset time of stimulus, this method is useful for resting-state fMRI data analysis to indicate the resting state in a given brain region. It has been used to investigate the functional modulations in the resting state in healthy aging subjects and in patients with Alzheimer disease, Parkinson disease, schizophrenia, and neuromyelitis optica. Importantly, using this method, Qiu et al. revealed that ReHo values in the bilateral OFC and medial thalamic of heroin addicts were lower than that in healthy subjects. However, at present we still lacked the knowledge about the changes of ReHo between heroin relapse and non-relapse patients receiving MMT.
In the present study, we included forty heroin addicts, and by using the resting-state fMRI technique to investigate the difference of resting-state brain function between heroin relapser and non-relapser in MMT patients by analysis of ReHo changes, trying to provide a further insight into the neurobiological mechanism underlying heroin relapse in MMT patients.
Methods.
Participants.
Sixty male former heroin addicts were recruited from the outpatient of the Baqiao Methadone Maintenance Treatment Center in Xi’an, Shaanxi Province, China. Patients were eligible for enrollment if they (a) met the diagnostic criteria of DSM-IV (Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fourth Edition) for heroin addiction; (b) willingly received long-term and stable MMT; (c) received at least three-month MMT; (d) were right-handed as judged by the Edinburgh Handedness Inventory. Patients were excluded if they (a) had a history of active neurological and psychiatric disorders besides heroin addiction, (b) had a history of head trauma, medical disorder requiring immediate treatment, and contraindications to MRI examination.
Additionally, co-morbidity of addiction and psychiatric disorders is very common in heroin addicts, and to avoid the potential influence of psychiatric symptoms, we excluded the patients who reported having a current or past psychiatric illness other than heroin addiction, as described in exclusion criteria. We also evaluated the baseline psychological problems which usually accompanied with heroin addiction, such as depression and anxiety. The Beck Depression Inventory II and Hamilton Anxiety Scale were used to evaluate the severity of depression and anxiety symptoms respectively. There were no significant differences in depression severity and anxiety level between groups (data not shown).
This study was approved by Institutional Board of the Fourth Military Medical University, Xi’an, China and conducted in accordance with Declaration of Helsinki. All participants were fully informed about the details of experiment and signed the written consents for their involvement and The proposed protocol conforms to the Good Clinical Practice and has been approved by the Ethics Committee of the Institute of Tangdu Hospital, Fourth Military Medical University, Shaanxi, China.
Experiment design and procedure.
There were 60 participants recruited in the study. According to the inclusion criteria exclusion criteria, 20 participants were excluded for having other active neurological and psychiatric disorders, head trauma, or contraindications to MRI examination, and 40 were included and then received a baseline resting-state fMRI scanning following with a succeeding 12-month clinical follow-up. During the follow-up, they were supervised under monthly structured interview and urine tests. The participants with once self-reported heroin use or/and positive urine tests were defined as heroin relapser, and those with negative results in tests were defined as non-relapser. Relapse rate of each heroin relapser was calculated as following: total numbers of positive results in tests during MMT/12. The subjective heroin craving was assessed by a 0–10 score visual analogue scale (VAS).
Image acquisition.
All MRI scans were conducted on a Signa EXCITEHD 3.0 T scanner (GE Healthcare, Milwaukee, USA) with an eight-channel head coil. A routine T2WI structural scan (parameters: TR = 5100 ms, TE = 117 ms, matrix = 416 × 416, FOV = 24 × 24 cm2, slice thickness = 5.5 mm, gap = 0.8 mm) was performed to exclude gross cerebral pathology and then a BOLD functional imaging data was acquired using T2*-weighted gradient-echo planar imaging pulse sequence (GE-EPI, 32 axial slices covering the whole brain, 150 volumes). The parameters were set as follows: TR = 2000 ms, TE = 30 ms, flip angle = 90°, matrix = 64 × 64, FOV = 256 × 256 mm2, slice thickness = 4 mm, gap = 0 mm; spatial resolution = 4 × 4 × 4 mm3. The corresponding high-resolution fast spoiled gradient-echo 3D T1-weighted images were also collected for anatomical overlays of the functional data and for spatial normalization of the datasets to a standard atlas and settings were as following: TR = 7.8 ms, TE = 3.0 ms, matrix = 256 × 256, FOV = 256 × 256 mm2, spatial resolution =1 × 1 × 1 mm3.
Data processing and regional homogeneity calculation.
Data preprocessing was performed with software (SPM12; http://www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm) as described previously. In brief, for each participant the first 10 time points were discarded to avoid transient signal changes before magnetization reached steady state. Translation and rotation were checked and subjects with head movements exceeding than 1 mm in any direction or head rotations greater than 1° were discarded. After the motion correction, spatial normalization was made to the Montreal Neurological Institute (MNI) template (resampling voxel size = 3 × 3 × 3 mm3). The T1-weighted high-resolution image volume was also spatially normalized to the MNI template. All images spatially normalized to MNI template were transformed to Talairach and Tournoux coordinates and then filtered by using a band-passed filter (0.01–0.08 Hz) to reduce the effect of low-frequency drifts and high-frequency noise. All the data was collected and analyzed by an author (Y.B.L., 5 years of experience in fMRI analysis) who was blinded to the present study.
For regional homogeneity (ReHo) analysis, the data were processed with a software (REST1.8; http://resting-fmri.sourceforge.net). The ReHo calculation procedure was performed as previously reported. In brief, it was performed on a voxel-by-voxel basis by calculating the Kendall Coefficient of Concordance (KCC) of the time series of a given voxel and that of its nearest neighbors. To reduce the influence of individual variation in the KCC, ReHo maps were normalized to the KCC of each voxel by the averaged KCC of the whole brain. The resulting data were then smoothed spatially with a 6-mm full width at half maximum Gaussian kernel to reduce noise and residual differences in gyral anatomy.
Statistical analysis.
To analyse the differences of ReHo values between heroin relapse and non-relapse patients under MMT, a two-sample t test was performed on the individual normalized ReHo maps in a voxel-by-voxel manner. A probability of p < 0.05 (corrected by FDR) was considered statistically significant.
Correlation analysis.
To evaluate the association of altered ReHo in different brain regions with heroin relapse in these relapsers, we performed Spearman's correlation analysis between mean ReHo values and relapse rates (as defined above) or subjective heroin craving indicated by VAS scores of each heroin relapser. The correlation analysis was based on non-parametric Spearman correlations and included only the relapsers. Threshold levels of significance for correlation coefficients were adjusted for multiple comparisons by a Bonferroni’s correction (p value was set as 0.05, and the number of tests was 8).