Title.
Cocaine dependence and thalamic functional connectivity: a multivariate pattern analysis.
Abstract.
Cocaine dependence is associated with deficits in cognitive control. Previous studies demonstrated that chronic cocaine use affects the activity and functional connectivity of the thalamus, a subcortical structure critical for cognitive functioning. However, the thalamus contains nuclei heterogeneous in functions, and it is not known how thalamic subregions contribute to cognitive dysfunctions in cocaine dependence. To address this issue, we used multivariate pattern analysis (MVPA) to examine how functional connectivity of the thalamus distinguishes 100 cocaine-dependent participants (CD) from 100 demographically matched healthy control individuals (HC). We characterized six task-related networks with independent component analysis of fMRI data of a stop signal task and employed MVPA to distinguish CD from HC on the basis of voxel-wise thalamic connectivity to the six independent components. In an unbiased model of distinct training and testing data, the analysis correctly classified 72% of subjects with leave-one-out cross-validation (p < 0.001), superior to comparison brain regions with similar voxel counts (p < 0.004, two-sample t test). Thalamic voxels that form the basis of classification aggregate in distinct subclusters, suggesting that connectivities of thalamic subnuclei distinguish CD from HC. Further, linear regressions provided suggestive evidence for a correlation of the thalamic connectivities with clinical variables and performance measures on the stop signal task. Together, these findings support thalamic circuit dysfunction in cognitive control as an important neural marker of cocaine dependence.
Highlights.
Cocaine dependence is associated with thalamic dysfunction and cognitive deficits.
The thalamus comprises subnuclei that differ in cognitive functions.
MVPA of thalamic connectivity distinguishes addicted from healthy individuals.
Thalamic voxels that identify addicts aggregate in clusters, resembling subnuclei.
Connectivity of thalamic clusters reflects specific changes in SST performance.
Introduction.
Cocaine dependence is a chronic, relapsing disorder. Previous studies have implicated deficits in cognitive control as a critical psychological factor contributing to continued drug use in dependent individuals. Numerous imaging studies described cortical and subcortical dysfunctions in individuals addicted to cocaine or other stimulants. For instance, chronic cocaine users showed hypo-activation of the thalamus during a visual spatial attention task. More recently, in a longitudinal study, we showed that decreased error-related activation of the thalamus predicts relapse and time to relapse to drug use in cocaine dependent individuals.
On the other hand, increased thalamic activations were observed in individuals with cocaine dependence and other addictive disorders when they were exposed to drug cues or situational factors related to drug use. This seeming inconsistency may relate to functional heterogeneity of the thalamus, with some subregions mediating craving and others subserving control of craving. Understanding how thalamic cortical circuits respond to different psychological constructs and behavioral contexts will help elucidate the multifaceted etiologies of cocaine addiction.
Many studies have demonstrated altered cerebral functional connectivities in cocaine dependence. Reduced connectivities were observed in cocaine users between the thalamus and midbrain, putamen and ventral tegmental area, and anterior cingulate cortex. The connectivity between the thalamus and midbrain and ventral tegmental area correlated negatively with the number of years of cocaine use. These studies suggest that cocaine use affects not only the activity but also connectivity of the thalamus. Investigating the functional connectivities of the thalamus may further uncover circuit-level disturbances in cocaine dependence.
Connectivity analysis has delineated functional subclusters of the thalamus in accordance with anatomy. Multivariate pattern analysis (MVPA), a data-driven technique, can provide new insights into cerebral functional organization. Compared to univariate analyses, MVPA fully utilizes activity patterns across multiple variables and increases sensitivity in differential diagnostics. MVPA has been used to predict behavioral variables and outcomes, decode cognitive states, and identify patients with depression, functional dyspepsia, autism, binge-eating, mild cognitive impairment/Alzheimer's disease, attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder, and schizophrenia, in a variety of behavioral contexts. However, to our knowledge, no studies have used MVPA to examine brain activity and connectivity in cocaine addiction.
Here, we applied MVPA to examine altered thalamic functional connectivity in participants with cocaine dependence (CD). Our earlier work of independent component analysis identified six independent networks of cognitive control from the stop signal task. We sought to distinguish CD from healthy controls (HC) with MVPA of voxel-wise thalamic connectivity to these six task-related networks (please see Methods). We posited that, first, thalamic connectivity to these networks should distinguish CD from HC at an accuracy higher than comparison regions with similar volumes (number of voxels). Second, the voxels of which the connectivities to a set of independent components determine the “membership” should aggregate in clusters (as subnuclei) rather than distribute randomly. Thus, we have these specific aims: to investigate whether we could identify CD using only functional connectivity of the thalamus; to examine how the individual voxels of the thalamus distinguish CD from HC with functional connectivities for cognitive control; and to explore the correlation of these connectivities with clinical and performance variables.
Materials and methods.
Subjects, informed consent, and assessment.
One hundred recently abstinent participants (62 men) with cocaine dependence (CD) and one hundred age- and gender-matched healthy adult (HC) subjects (55 men) participated in this study (Table 1). CD met criteria for current cocaine dependence, as diagnosed by the Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV. Recent cocaine use was confirmed by urine toxicology screens. They were drug-free while staying in an inpatient unit prior to the current fMRI study. All subjects were physically healthy with no major medical illnesses or current use of prescription medications. None reported having a history of head injury or neurological illness. Other exclusion criteria included dependence on another psychoactive substance (except nicotine) and current or past history of psychotic disorders. Individuals with current depressive or anxiety symptoms requiring treatment or currently being treated for these symptoms were excluded as well. The Human Investigation committee at Yale University School of Medicine approved all study procedures, and all subjects signed an informed consent prior to study participation.
CD's were assessed with the Beck Depression Inventory and the State-Trait Anxiety Inventory at admission. The mean (± SD) BDI (12.2 ± 8.9) and STAI state (36.2 ± 10.7) and trait (40.7 ± 11.2) scores were within the range reported previously for individuals with cocaine dependence. Cocaine craving was assessed with the cocaine craving questionnaire, brief version (CCQ-Brief), for all participants every two to three days. The CCQ-Brief is a 10-item questionnaire, abbreviated from the CCQ-Now. It is highly correlated with the CCQ-Now and other cocaine craving measures. Each item was rated on a scale from 1 to 7, with a higher total score (ranging from 10 to 70) indicating greater craving. CDs averaged CCQ scores of 20.0 ± 7.8 across all assessments and 18.0 ± 5.5 on the day or within 2–3 days of the scan. The majority of CDs received all of these assessments, and subjects with missing data were not included in the correlation analyses (see below).
Behavioral task and scan procedures.
We employed a stop-signal task (SST) as detailed in our previous studies. Briefly, there were two trial types: “go” and “stop,” randomly intermixed. A small dot appeared on the screen to engage attention at the beginning of a go trial. After a randomized time interval (fore-period) between 1s and 5s, the dot turned into a circle, prompting the subjects to quickly press a button. The circle vanished at button press or after 1s had elapsed, whichever came first, and the trial terminated. A premature button press prior to the appearance of the circle also terminated the trial. Three quarters of all trials were go trials. In a stop trial, an additional “X,” the “stop” signal, appeared after the go signal. The subjects were instructed to withhold button pressing upon seeing the stop signal. Likewise, a trial terminated at button press or when 1s had elapsed since the appearance of the stop signal. The stop trials constituted the remaining one quarter of the trials. There was an inter-trial-interval of 2 s. The stop signal delay (SSD) started at 200 ms and varied from one stop trial to the next according to a staircase procedure, increasing and decreasing by 64 ms each after a successful and failed stop trial. Subjects were instructed to respond to the go signal quickly while keeping in mind that a stop signal could appear occasionally. Each subject completed four 10 min runs of the task after a practice session outside the scanner. With the staircase procedure, we anticipated that the subjects would succeed in withholding their response in approximately 50% of stop trials.
Analyses of behavioral data.
We computed a critical SSD that represents the time delay between go and stop signals that a subject would need to succeed in 50% of the stop trials. Specifically, SSDs across trials were grouped into runs, with each run defined as a monotonically increasing or decreasing series. We derived a mid-run estimate by taking the middle SSD (or average of the two middle SSDs when there was an even number of SSDs) of every second run. The critical SSD was computed by taking the mean of all mid-run SSDs. It was reported that, except for experiments with a small number of trials (less than 30), the mid-run estimate was close to the maximum likelihood estimate of X50 (50% positive response; i.e., 50% stop success or SS in the SST,). The stop signal reaction time (SSRT) was computed by subtracting the critical SSD from the median go trial reaction time (RT).
We computed the fore-period effect as an index of motor preparedness during the SST. Briefly, longer fore-periods are associated with faster RTs. RT was compared between go trials with a fore-period between 3 and 5 s and between 1 and 3 s, and the effect size of RT difference was defined as fore-period effect. It is also known that in a RT task, the RT of a correct response is prolonged following an error, compared with other correct responses, and this prolonged RT is thought to reflect error monitoring. We thus computed the RT difference between the go trials that followed a stop error (SE) and those that followed another go trial, and termed the effect size of this RT difference “post-error slowing” (PES).
Imaging protocol.
Conventional T1-weighted spin echo sagittal anatomical images were acquired for slice localization using a 3T scanner (Siemens Trio). Anatomical images of the functional slice locations were next obtained with spin-echo imaging in the axial plane parallel to the AC–PC line with TR = 300 ms, TE = 2.5 ms, bandwidth = 300 Hz/pixel, flip angle = 60°, field of view = 220 mm × 220 mm, matrix = 256 × 256, 32 slices with slice thickness = 4 mm and no gap. Functional, blood oxygen level-dependent (BOLD) signals were then acquired with a single-shot gradient echo echo planar imaging (EPI) sequence. Thirty-two axial slices parallel to the AC–PC line covering the whole brain were acquired with TR = 2000 ms, TE = 25ms, bandwidth = 2004 Hz/pixel, flip angle = 85°, field of view = 220 mm × 220mm, matrix = 64 × 64, 32 slices with slice thickness = 4 mm and no gap.
Spatial preprocessing.
Data were analyzed with Statistical Parametric Mapping (SPM8, Wellcome Department of Imaging Neuroscience, University College London, U.K.). Images from the first five TRs at the beginning of each trial were discarded to enable the signal to achieve steady-state equilibrium between RF pulsing and relaxation. Standard image preprocessing was performed. Images of each individual subject were first realigned (motion corrected) and corrected for slice timing. A mean functional image volume was constructed for each subject per run from the realigned image volumes. These mean images were co-registered with the high-resolution structural image and then segmented for normalization with affine registration followed by nonlinear transformation. The normalization parameters determined for the structure volume were then applied to the corresponding functional image volumes for each subject. Finally, the images were smoothed with a Gaussian kernel of 8 mm at Full Width at Half Maximum.
Independent component analysis.
Preprocessed time series were analyzed with a group ICA algorithm (GIFT, http://icatb.sourceforge.net/, version 1.3i) to identify spatially independent and temporally coherent networks. ICA identifies distinct groups of brain regions with the same temporal pattern of hemodynamic signal change.
The data of CD (n = 100) and HC (n = 100) individuals were reduced through principal component analysis and separated into 30 maximally independent components (ICs) with an infomax algorithm. The dimensionality was determined by the modified minimal description length (MDL) criteria as implemented in GIFT and averaged across subjects. A time course for each IC and its corresponding spatial map was obtained. This analysis was repeated 20 times with ICASSO to assess the repeatability of ICs. Finally, component time courses and spatial maps, which captured individual differences in the expression of the ICA-derived component, were back reconstructed for each participant. Following our previous study, six ICs, including a motor cortical network for motor preparation and execution, a right fronto-parietal network for attentional monitoring, a left fronto-parietal network for response inhibition, a midline cortico-subcortical network for error processing, a cuneus-precuneus network for behavioral engagement, and a default-mode network (DMN) for self-referential processing, were included for further analyses.
We normalized back-reconstructed spatial maps of each IC into z-scores and averaged them across runs for each participant. A one-sample t test was applied to the “z maps” across all participants to define significant brain regions associated with each IC.
Multivariate pattern analysis (MVPA) of the thalamic connectivity.
Fig. 1 illustrates the analyses step-by-step with details described as follows. A multivariate pattern classifier was trained to identify CD from HC, followed by cross-validation using “leave-one-out”. Briefly, one CD or HC was left out as testing data while the remaining subjects were used to train the classifier. This procedure was repeated until each of the 100 CD and 100 HC was selected once as the validation data. A thalamus mask (698 voxels) was obtained from the Automated Anatomical Labeling atlas. For each participant, we extracted z values of thalamic voxels for all 6 ICs as a classification feature vector, resulting in a total of 698 × 6 = 4188 features. The feature space was refined by retaining the most discriminating features, as assessed by feature-wise two-sample t tests of CD versus HC using training data only; features that differed between CD and HC at p < 0.05, uncorrected were included in the feature set for classification. Since a distinct set of features were selected from each set of training data, the final feature set differed slightly from iteration to iteration. We thus used the frequency with which each feature was included in the classification sets across all iterations to represent its discriminative power.
We employed a support vector machine (SVM) classifier with a linear kernel function for classification, as in previous work of MVPA. Linear SVM helps to weigh down the effect of noisy features that are highly correlated. According to the results of cross-validation, we used the generalization rate, sensitivity and specificity to quantify the performance of our classifier. The generalization rate represents the overall prediction rate of CD and HC combined, whereas the sensitivity and specificity each characterizes the prediction rates of CD and HC.
We used permutation tests to examine the statistical significance of the observed classification accuracy. In each permutation, the group label of the training data were randomly permuted prior to training and a generalization rate was computed. The permutation was repeated 1000 times to obtain a distribution of generalization rates, against which the accuracy in classification of the veridically labeled data was tested.
In addition to the thalamus, we examined other AAL masks with a similar volume for comparison. These regions included the paracentral lobule (695 voxels), the caudate (658 voxels), middle part of orbital frontal gyrus (694 voxels), parahippocampal gyrus (728 voxels), and inferior occipital gyrus (638 voxels), all with a volume close to the thalamus (698 voxels).