Title.
Reward Contingencies Improve Goal-Directed Behavior by Enhancing Posterior Brain Attentional Regions and Increasing Corticostriatal Connectivity in Cocaine Addicts.
Abstract.
The dopaminergic system provides the basis for the interaction between motivation and cognition. It is triggered by the possibility of obtaining rewards to initiate the neurobehavioral adaptations necessary to achieve them by directing the information from motivational circuits to cognitive and action circuits. In drug addiction, the altered dopamine (DA) modulation of the meso-cortico-limbic reward circuitry, such as the prefrontal cortex (PFC), underlies the disproportionate motivational value of drug use at the expense of other non-drug reinforcers and the user’s loss of control over his/her drug intake. We examine how the magnitude of the reward affects goal-directed processes in healthy control (HC) subjects and abstinent cocaine dependent (ACD) patients by using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) during a counting Stroop task with blocked levels of monetary incentives of different magnitudes (€0, €0.01, €0.5, €1 or €1.5). Our results showed that increasing reward magnitude enhances (1) performance facilitation in both groups; (2) left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) activity in HC and left superior occipital cortex activity in ACD; and (3) left DLPFC and left putamen connectivity in ACD compared to HC. Moreover, we observed that (4) dorsal striatal and pallidum activity was associated with craving and addiction severity during the parametric increases in the monetary reward. In conclusion, the brain response to gradients in monetary value was different in HC and ACD, but both groups showed improved task performance due to the possibility of obtaining greater monetary rewards.
Introduction.
Drug addiction is characterized by an enhanced and recurring motivational value of the drug, at the expense of other non-drug reinforcers, and an impaired ability to inhibit intentional actions associated with strong desires to take the drug that result in a pathological and compulsive pattern of drug-seeking and drug-taking. This process occupies an inordinate amount of an individual’s time and thoughts, and it persists despite adverse consequences.
During goal-directed behavior, changes in DA activity transform information about a reward into abstract cognitive decisions, which in turn are translated into specific actions taken to achieve the reward. However, DA-mediated appetitive motivation drives behaviors that are not always under goal-directed control and can be maladaptive, as occurs in drug addiction. Specifically, the improper DA modulation of the PFC via frontostriatal connections implies PFC dysfunction and the user’s loss of control over the drug craving. This craving is characterized by great salience and brain reactivity to cocaine-related stimuli at the expense of other appetitive stimuli, and it is considered a sign of addiction severity in drug users.
Chronic cocaine users often perform poorly on goal-directed tasks. However, in spite of frontostriatal dysfunction, reward seems to behaviorally improve cognitive performance similarly in cocaine addicts and in HC by involving the compensatory activity of other brain regions, such as the occipital, parietal or temporal lobes. Unlike controls, addicts show a disruption in the ability to perceive inner motivational drives because there is no relationship between reward induced improvement and self-reported interest in the reward value. Therefore, the increase in awareness of inner motivational drives and the improvement in goal-directed behavior produced by reward contingencies via brain compensation may be two of the most important points to consider in dealing with drug addiction at the psychological and neurobiological levels.
In this study, HC and ACD performed a counting Stroop task using blocked levels of monetary incentives to analyze the effects of parametric increases in monetary rewards on performance and brain activation patterns. The aims of our study include comparing HC and ACD on how the parametric increses in the monetary reward magnitude modulates: (1) the performance during goal-directed behavior (e.g., reaction time, accuracy, and response variability) and the relationship between performance and self-reported interest in the reward value; (2) the brain activation in frontal and striatal regions generally involved in Stroop performance and posterior brain regions involved in the Stroop task in ACD; (3) the connectivity between the PFC and striatal regions; and (4) the way individual differences in clinical variables such as craving or severity dependence are related to the modulation of the reward magnitude on brain function. We hypothesized that as the size of the reward contingencies increases: (1) the task performance will improve in both experimental groups, but this improvement will be related to self-reported interest in the reward value only in HC; and (2) the activity of the prefrontal regions will be deficiently modulated in ACD compared to HC, but ACD will enhance the activation of other brain regions to counteract prefrontal impairment; moreover, (3) ACD prefrontal function will be related to a different pattern of frontostriatal connectivity compared to HC; and (4) higher scores on clinical variable scales will be related to activation of the frontal and striatal regions during the reward magnitude increases.
Materials and Methods.
Participants.
Thirty-seven HC and thirty-four ACD, matched on age, sex, laterality, and educational level, participated in this study (see Table 1). On the one hand, ACD patients were recruited from the Addictive Behaviors Unit in Castellón and Sagunto (Spain) from patients who regularly visit the clinic to manage their abstinence. In addition to behavioral and/or pharmacological treatment, patients were monitored for continued abstinence with urine toxicology testing or through clinical interviews with a psychiatrist who supervised treatment. All 34 patients received the primary Axis I diagnosis of cocaine dependence according to the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fourth Edition (DSM-IV). Due to the high rates of comorbidity with alcohol and other drug abuse in the patient population, patients were not excluded if they had abused other drugs or alcohol prior to the onset of their cocaine abstinence. On the other hand, the HC group was recruited by placing posters in public places such as town halls and universities, and through word of mouth. A previous interview collected past and current drug use data and ensured that HC had no history of psychoactive substance dependence or abuse. Exclusion criteria for HC and ACD were as follows: 1) Any major psychiatric illness; 2) Head trauma resulting in loss of consciousness for longer than 30 min; 3) Presence of any past or current brain pathology; 4) The presence of any contraindications to an MRI environment. Before the scanning session, the ACD filled in two addiction severity-related scales: the Cocaine Selective Severity Assessment (CSSA,) and the Spanish version of the Severity Dependence Scale (SDS,). Furthermore, patients were screened on their craving-related score, based on the 12-item Spanish version of the Cocaine Craving Questionnaire-General (SCCQ-G-12,) (see Table 1). All the participants received information about the nature of the research, provided written informed consent prior to participating in the study, and received a monetary award for their participation depending on their performance on the task. The institutional Review Board of the Universitat Jaume I (Castellón, east Spain) approved this study.
Task design.
We scanned all the participants while they performed a counting Stroop task with reward contingencies (see Fig 1). The task was an adaptation from an earlier study. Participants viewed sets of one to four identical number words that appeared on the screen in each trial during the entire paradigm: “one”, “two”, “three” and “four” (“uno”, “dos”, “tres” “cuatro” in Spanish). We instructed them to respond as quickly as possible by pressing a button on a keypad containing two buttons for each hand (Response Grips, NordicNeuroLab, Norway), coinciding with the number of words in each set. Inside the scanner, subjects performed 10 functional blocks consisting of 26 trials each, yielding a total of 260 trials. Each block included 5 congruent trials (15%, n = 40), where the number of words agreed with the number word, (e.g., "two" "two", response: two). On the incongruent trials (85%, n = 220, 21 in each block), the number of words was discordant with the number word, (e.g., "one" "one", response: two). Congruent trials were intermixed among the incongruent trials to minimize strategy effects and increase interference. In addition, we applied a linear parametric approach with five “reward” conditions corresponding to the possibility of obtaining different monetary incomes (€0, €0.01, €0.5, 1€, €1.5) for correct task performance. Participants repeated each condition in two random blocks within a single run. Our goal was to analyze the effects of reward on goal-directed behavior and, to this end, we examined the effects of reward increases during the performance of a blocked interference condition rather than during a passive conditioning task. We applied a parametric design to avoid the shortcomings of using a neutral or congruent condition for cognitive subtraction. Instead, we included a fixation point shown for 7200 milliseconds (msec.) between each task block as the baseline, which also precluded carryover effects.
The fMRI paradigm started with a baseline block. After this first baseline block and in the following ones, task blocks started with a cue (C) that appeared and lasted 2 seconds (sec.) The cue informed the participants about the amount of money (€0, €0.01, €0.5, €1 or €1.5) they could win for each correct response within each corresponding Stroop block. After each cue, we displayed a fixation point for 500 msec. just to maintain participants’ attention. Afterward, we presented 26 trials, each lasting 1000 msec. with an inter-trial interval of 400 msec. The duration of each Stroop block was 46.7 sec., whereas total task duration was 7 minutes and 41 sec. Participants did not receive feedback on their performance at any time during the task, only at the end. The stimuli presented throughout all the trials were white on a black background (resolution of 800x600 pixels). We controlled the stimulus presentation with the Presentation software (http://www.neurobs.com).
Before they entered the scanner, we instructed all the participants about the task by reading identical instructions. The instructions explained that the participants had to respond to the number of words that appeared on the screen, not to the number word. We also told them that before each set of trials, they would see an informative cue that determined the amount of money they would receive for each correct response obtained in each set of trials (e.g., €0.50), and they would receive a monetary reward when participation ended, based on their task performance. Thus, their main goal was to win as much money as possible. After receiving the instructions, the participants completed a practice version with 90 trials to minimize practice effects and get used to matching responses to the button to press. Upon task completion, we asked 67 subjects (34 HCs and 33 ACDs) to rate their self-reported interest in the reward value for the five monetary amounts on a visual analogue scale (range: 0 to 7, boring to interesting, respectively).
fMRI Acquisition.
We acquired blood oxygenation level-dependent (BOLD) fMRI data in a 1.5-Teslas Siemens Avanto (Erlangen, Germany). We helped subjects to enter the MRI scanner and lie in a supine position. We immobilized their heads with cushions to reduce motion artifacts. We presented the stimuli via MRI-compatible goggles, and we used a response system to control performance during the scanning session (Response grips, NordicNeuroLab). We obtained functional scans using a gradient-echo T2*-weighted echo-planar MR sequence (TR = 2000ms; TE = 48 ms; matrix = 64 x 64, voxel size = 3.5 x 3.5 x 4 mm, flip angle = 90°, 4.5-mm thickness, slice gap of 0.5 mm). We acquired 24 interleaved axial slices parallel to the hippocampi and covering the entire brain. Prior to the functional MRI sequences, we acquired structural images using a high-resolution T1-weighted sequence with TR / TE = 2200 / 3.849 ms, FOV = 224 mm, matrix = 256 x 256 x 160, voxel size = 1 x 1 x 1 mm, which facilitated the localization and co-registration of the functional data.
fMRI preprocessing.
We preprocessed and analyzed the data with the SPM8 software package (Statistical Parametric Mapping 8; Wellcome Department of Imaging Neuroscience; http://www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm), as implemented in MATLAB R2007a (Mathworks, Inc., Natick, MA, USA). Preprocessing first included the realignment of each scan per individual to the first scan to correct motion-related artefacts (movement parameters never exceeded 2 mm of translation or 2 degrees of rotation in any direction for any participant). Second, the normalization to a standard EPI template was carried out in accordance with the Montreal Neurological Institute (MNI) template by applying an affine transformation followed by nonlinear deformation, and using the basic functions defined in the SPM program. We applied the computed transformation parameters to all the functional images by interpolating them to a final voxel size of 3 x 3 x 3 mm. Finally, we spatially smoothed the images with an 8 x 8 x 8 mm (Full Width at Half Maximum; FWHM) Gaussian kernel.
Statistical analyses.
Behavioral analysis.
Three variables related to task performance were analyzed: mean reaction time (RT) on correct responses, error rate (%), and RT variability. We measured RT variability as within-subject RT standard deviation (SDrt), as in previous studies. We did not consider the analysis of the congruency effect because the small number of these trials and their inclusion in blocks with a higher proportion of incongruent trials may lead to unreliable estimations of the congruency effect. Therefore, we focused on the incongruent trials. In order to compare HC and ACD on the effect of parametric increases in the monetary reward magnitude on RT, error rate and SDrt, we conducted three 5x2 mixed-design ANOVAs, including the within-subject factor Reward (€0, €0.01, €0.5, €1 or €1.5) and the between-subject factor Group (HC, ACD). Moreover, we analyzed the relationship between self-reported interest in the reward value and the performance variables, for HC and ACD separately, by correlating the self-reported interest in the reward value for each reward magnitude with the respective individual RT, error rate, and SDrt (e.g., self-reported interest in reward value for €1 correlated with RT for the €1 condition). We also tested for between-group differences in these correlation coefficients by means of Fisher’s r-to-z transformation, applying the Bonferroni correction for multiple comparisons. Based on this method, we divided the a priori selected threshold of p < .05 by the number of within variables group comparisons (k = 5), which stabilized statistical levels as significant if less than .01. We carried out these analyses using SPSS v.20 (Statistical Package for Social Sciences; SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL, USA).
FMRI data analysis.
We performed statistical analyses following the General Lineal Model (GLM). In a block design analysis, we modeled each participant’s preprocessed time series under different conditions, using a boxcar function convolved with the hemodynamic response function. The model included seven regressors: five regressors that modeled the Stroop blocks for each monetary condition separately (€0, €0.01, €0.5, €1 or €1.5), one regressor that modeled the baseline condition (“*” for 7200 msec.), and another regressor that modeled all the informative cues. We also removed intrinsic autocorrelations by using a high-pass filter with a cut-off frequency of 128 Hz, which eliminated low-frequency components. Finally, we included the motion parameters for each subject’s realignment correction in the model as “nuisance” variables.
We generated statistical contrast images to obtain neural regions sensitive to reward gradients while performing the Stroop task, by subtracting the €0 condition from the rest of the reward magnitudes (R1 = “€0.01 vs. 0€”; R2 = “€0.5 vs. €0”; R3 = “€1 vs. €0”; R4 = “€1.5 vs. €0”). For a second-level analysis (random effects), we calculated a 4x2 mixed-design ANOVA, including the within-subject factor Reward (R1, R2, R3, R4) and the between-subject factor Group (HC, ACD) to compare HC and ACD on how parametric increases in the size of the monetary reward modulate brain activity, using the parameter estimates for the four conditions. For this parametric analysis of reward magnitudes, we fitted a parametric contrast from R1 to R4 [–2–1 1 2] as a linear signal increase from R1 to R4. Then, in order to evaluate the brain areas that showed a higher parametric modulation in HC than in ACD, we fitted the contrast [–2–1 1 2 2 1–1–2], taking into account that the first four levels pertain to the HC group, and the latter four to the ACD group. By contrast, to test the brain areas where ACD showed a higher parametric modulation than HC, we fitted the contrast [2 1–1–2–2–1 1 2].
Psychophysiological interactions.
The PPI analysis determines the regions whose time series of activation exhibit significant covariance with the seed. PPI is a context-dependent connectivity measure used to explain the regional activity of other brain regions in terms of the interaction between responses in a seed region and a cognitive process. We carried out a PPI analysis using the generalized PPI toolbox (gPPI; http://www.nitrc.org/projects/gppi;). For each participant and task condition (psychological variables) in the gPPI, we calculated an interaction term using the de-convolved activity of the seed region and the separate regressors that represented the task conditions. Then we re-convolved the calculated interaction terms with the hemodynamic response function and included them in a GLM model, along with the time course of the seed region, the regressors modeling the task conditions, and the motion parameters. In the present study, we planned to perform a gPPI for each brain area in the PFC that showed significant differences between groups in parametric modulation as a function of the reward magnitude (see the Results section). After generating the model, we performed contrast images using the beta-weights for the interaction terms. Specifically, we generated statistical contrast images by subtracting the €0 condition from the rest of the reward magnitudes (once again, R1, R2, R3, R4) to test which regions changed their task-related connectivity with the seed as a function of the monetary reward. We performed a 4x2 mixed-design ANOVA, including the within-subject factor Reward (R1, R2, R3, R4) and the between-subject factor Group (HC, ACD) in order to compare HC and ACD on the way parametric increases in monetary reward magnitude modulate the connectivity between the prefrontal and striatal regions, and we fitted the same contrast as in the fMRI analysis to test between-group differences.
Regression analysis.
Regression analyses were utilized to investigate the relationship between individual scores on the CSSA, SDS and SCCQ-N-10 questionnaires and brain activation during reward magnitude increases.
Region-of-interest analysis.
We focused our analyses on regions of interest (ROIs) for two reasons: to analyze the brain regions previously associated with interference task performance in cocaine addiction, and to maximize statistical power. Following Moeller et al.,, we defined the bilateral dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) (x, y, z MNI coordinates x = 44, y = 22, z = 11/-44, 21, 11) and bilateral anterior cingulate cortex (6, 23, 39/-6, 23, 38), as in the Leung et al. study, which used the color-word task, the most widely employed Stroop task in studies evaluating the effects of cocaine addiction. On the other hand, the only previous study that evaluates interference resolution during a counting Stroop task found differences between HC and ACD in the right inferior frontal gyrus (45, 17,-8), right inferior parietal gyrus (53, -39, 38), and right superior temporal gyrus (53, -41, 2); thus, we also defined these areas as ROIs. We also defined posterior brain regions such as the left superior occipital cortex (-42, -88, 30), left inferior parietal cortex (-28, -38, 54), and bilateral fusiform gyrus (46, -58, -30/-24, -2, -44), based on previous task interference related effects. We drew the ROI masks according to the Automatic Atlas Labeling from the WFU-PickAtlas, using a 10-mm-radius sphere centered at the peak voxel of each cluster. We also defined the bilateral caudate, putamen, and pallidum as ROIs, selected from pre-established regions of the Pickatlas toolbox, due to their involvement in the reward dopaminergic system, cognitive control and action, and cocaine addiction in association with prefrontal areas.
All previous analyses, including parametric effects, psychophysiological interactions, and regression analyses, were based on previously defined ROIs, in which significant effects were corrected for multiple comparisons by applying a threshold at a voxel-wise corrected level (FWE at p < .05) for each ROI independently. Furthermore, we ran post-hoc analyses to examine what drove the parametric effects in all previous analyses (e.g., functional parametric effects, psychophysiological interactions, and regression analyses), obtaining a more thorough picture of what was driving the effects. However, these analyses should not be considered for statistical inference as they were biased estimates of the effect because the ROIs were non-independent but based on the parametric contrast. In order to perform these ROI analyses, we extracted the signal from within the ROIs. Thus, we extracted the eigenvariate values from the ROIs, as implemented in SPM8. It should be noted that eigenvariate values are not the same as mean values. For the sake of reducing response heterogeneity within the cluster, eigenvariate values provide an eigenvector that downweights atypical voxels within the voxels that pass the original threshold, flexibly combining functional (e.g., statistical contrast) and anatomical (e.g., ROI coordinates) constraints.