Title.
Neural mechanisms of extinguishing drug and pleasant cue associations in human addiction: role of the VMPFC.
Abstract.
The neurobiological mechanisms that underlie the resistance of drug cue associations to extinction in drug addiction remain unknown. Fear extinction critically depends on the ventromedial prefrontal cortex (VMPFC). Here we tested if this same region plays a role in extinction of non-fear, drug and pleasant cue associations. Eighteen chronic cocaine users and 15 matched controls completed three functional MRI scans. Participants first learned to associate an abstract cue (the conditioned stimulus, CS) with a drug-related (CSD+) or pleasant (CSP+) image. Extinction immediately followed where each CS was repeatedly presented without the corresponding image. Participants underwent a second identical session 24 h later to assess retention of extinction learning. Results showed that like fear extinction, non-fear based extinction relies on the VMPFC. However, extinction-related changes in the VMPFC differed by cue valence and diagnosis. In controls, VMPFC activation to the CSD+ (which was unpleasant for participants) gradually increased as in fear extinction, while it decreased to the CSP+, consistent with a more general role of the VMPFC in flexible value updating. Supporting a specific role in extinction retention, we further observed a cross-day association between VMPFC activation and skin conductance, a classic index of conditioned responses. Finally, cocaine users showed VMPFC abnormalities for both CSs, which in the case of the CSD+, correlated with craving. These data suggest a global deficit in extinction learning in this group that may hinder extinction-based treatment efforts. More broadly, these data show the VMPFC, when functionally intact, supports extinction learning in diverse contexts in humans.
Introduction.
Extinction is the process by which conditioned responses to an otherwise neutral cue (a conditioned stimulus, CS) that has acquired affective properties after being paired with an arousing event (an unconditioned stimulus, US) gradually diminish when the cue is no longer reinforced. The predominant view is that extinction does not eliminate the CS–US association; rather, it leads to a lessening in the conditioned response by creating a new (CS–no–US) association that competes for expression, leaving memory vulnerable to recovery of the conditioned response. Extinction has been extensively studied in humans and non-human animals in the domain of fear learning, e.g., using electric shock, aversive sounds, and even monetary loss. However, less is known about extinction in the appetitive domain, and while animal work suggests similarities in the neurobiological mechanisms of extinction of, e.g., drug seeking and fear, the mechanism of non-fear based extinction in humans remains unknown.
Addiction is characterized by continued drug seeking and use despite reduced pleasure derived from the drug and catastrophic health and social consequences. This behavior is assumed to be at least partly driven by a learning process in which cues associated with drug consumption acquire excessive and persistent salience, perpetuating drug seeking. The persistence of drug seeking despite negative consequences and a reduction in the drug’s rewarding effects suggests that addicted individuals may have diminished ability to form and/or maintain new associations for cues that were previously, although no longer, predictive of drug rewards (e.g., learning that the drug or drug-associated cues are no longer as valuable). This is also predicted by the neural circuitry that supports extinction learning, which overlaps extensively with that directly impacted by addictive substances and addiction, potentially rendering this process especially vulnerable in this population.
Substantial work in the fear domain demonstrates a central role for the ventromedial prefrontal cortex (VMPFC) in the formation, retention, and later retrieval of extinction learning. In humans, VMPFC activity increases during fear extinction and extinction retrieval, and both neural activity and cortical thickness in this region correlate with psychophysiological indices of extinction success [e.g., lowered skin conductance response (SCR) to the CS]. Beyond fear extinction, the VMPFC along with the striatum form what is known as the ‘brain’s valuation system’, a set of regions that represent (and possibly update) value in a domain-general manner. In addiction, the VMPFC and striatum are implicated in the experience of craving, a motivational state often triggered by drug-associated cues that can promote drug seeking.
This more general role of the VMPFC in valuation and craving suggests the VMPFC may also be a candidate region involved in extinction of non-fear-based and secondary reinforcers, including drug-related and appetitive cues. However, while the effect of extinction-based therapy on drug-cue reactivity has just begun to be examined, no studies to date have investigated the role of the VMPFC in extinction learning itself in human addiction. Such an investigation has important implications for the potential utility of extinction-based therapies for addiction, and for the basic neuroscientific understanding of non-fear-based extinction more generally.
Modeled after classical fear-conditioning studies, here we examined the neural correlates of extinction learning for drug and pleasant cue associations in non-treatment seeking, chronic cocaine users and socio-demographically matched healthy non-drug users in a 2-day functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) study. The study comprised an acquisition phase, where participants learned to associate an abstract cue with a drug-related (CSD+) or pleasant (CSP+) image, and two extinction phases (the latter for assessing the retention of extinction from day 1), where the abstract cues were repeatedly presented without the corresponding images. Throughout, we collected SCR and blood-oxygen-level-dependent (BOLD) response, time-locked to the presentation of the abstract cue, as indices of the conditioned response. We hypothesized that the VMPFC and striatum would exhibit parametric changes across the learning phases as participants form new, affectively neutral, associations with the CSD+ and CSP+. We expected cocaine users to show abnormalities in these regions for both cues.
Materials and Methods.
Participants.
Participants were native English speakers recruited from the community through advertisements and by word of mouth who provided written informed consent to participate in accordance with the local institutional review board. Participants were chronic cocaine users and healthy individuals with no history of drug or psychiatric illness. To minimize the influence of factors other than those related to cocaine addiction, the groups were selected to match on multiple socio-demographic characteristics and cigarette smoking status (see Table 1). All participants were asked to complete study procedures on two separate days (psychophysiological measures and fMRI; see below). The final sample consisted of 18 cocaine users and 15 healthy controls. G*Power 3.1.9.2 was used to determine whether this sample was sufficiently powered. Given a 2 (group) × 3 (learning phase) mixed design, 80% desired power, α error probability=0.05, and a within-between subject interaction of a large effect size (Cohen’s d, henceforth referred to simply as d, of 0.8), it was determined that N=12 participants would be needed. For a medium effect size (d=0.5), N=28 participants would be needed. Thus, our sample of N=33 was sufficiently powered for effect sizes of d≥0.5.
All participants were in good health and not currently taking medication. Drug use and psychiatric histories were ascertained by a comprehensive clinical interview administered by trained research staff with extensive experience evaluating drug addicted populations, consisting of the Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV Axis I Disorders [research version ] and the Addiction Severity Index. Exclusion criteria for both groups were: (A) history of head trauma, neurological disease, or loss of consciousness >30 min; (B) abnormal vital signs; (C) history of major medical conditions; (D) history of major psychiatric disorders (other than substance use disorders in the cocaine group, and nicotine use disorder in both groups); (E) positive urine pregnancy test in females; (F) contraindications to MRI; and (G) except for cocaine in the cocaine user group, positive urine screens for psychoactive drugs or their metabolites.
Cocaine users were non-treatment seeking individuals who reported an average lifetime history of 17 years of cocaine use, 2 days/week of cocaine use in the past 30 days, and some cocaine use within the past 4 months (see Table 1 for detailed drug use information). Participants identified cocaine as their primary drug of choice, meeting criteria for cocaine dependence (n=17) or abuse (n=1) [in early full (n=2) or partial (n=1) remission]. Current comorbid disorders included alcohol dependence (n=2) and marijuana abuse (n=2); one participant also met criteria for a current depressive episode. Thirteen cocaine users and 6 controls were cigarette smokers. Six participants tested positive for cocaine on day 1 (indicating use ≤72 h) and 4 tested positive for cocaine on day 2. Controls tested negative for all drugs on both study days. Apart from number of days since last use (Z=1.87, P=0.06), cocaine urine positive and cocaine urine negative participants (based on day 1 status) did not differ in their clinical profile (i.e., they did not differ in any of the drug use variables listed in Table 1; P>0.086). Nevertheless, because the passage of time from last use (day 1 to day 2) was associated with a reduction in craving and withdrawal (Table 1) and because there is some clinical and preclinical evidence to suggest that recent cocaine exposure impacts learning, we tested if cocaine urine status modified any of the observed diagnostic group effects.
Study Procedures & fMRI Task.
All participants completed three fMRI sessions conducted over two consecutive days (99 total sessions; Figure 1). To ensure comparable experiences between sessions and across the two study days, and to control the time in-between, participants were overnighted in the laboratory. On day 1, after a period of acclimation to the scanner environment, participants first learned to associate a colored square, the CS, with different types of “USs”. This created three cue types: CSD+ (CS paired with a drug-related image of a person smoking crack), CSP+ (CS paired with a pleasant image of a smiling baby), and CS− (CS paired with a neutral image of an unadorned wooden basket). The acquisition phase consisted of 13 paired trials in which each CS presentation co-terminated with presentation of the corresponding US and 7 unpaired trials in which each CS was presented without the US, for a total of 20 trials per cue type (60 total). Participants were instructed to “try and figure out which color predicted which image.” Day 1 extinction immediately followed, and began with 2 paired trials followed by 20 unpaired trials for each cue type (66 total). Participants completed another, identical extinction session ~24 h later but without the paired reminder trials. Trial order was pseudo-randomized in all sessions and CS color assignment was counterbalanced across participants. SCR and fMRI data were acquired throughout. Participants earned $25/session (max $75).
Participants also completed two-alternative forced choice tasks and provided subjective ratings for the task stimuli (see Supporting Information). No SCR or fMRI data were collected during these tasks. These data confirmed that, as expected based on our prior work in independent samples of cocaine addicted and control subjects, participants found the drug-related image as least pleasant (and chose to view it least often) and the affectively pleasant image as most pleasant (and chose to view it most often). Controls additionally rated the drug-related image as more unpleasant (and chose to view it less often) than cocaine users (Figure S1A–B).
SCR Acquisition & Analysis.
Skin conductance was acquired with shielded Ag-AgCl electrodes (AD Instruments, Inc.) attached to the second and big toes of the left foot. The electrode cables were grounded through an RF filter panel. Data were continuously recorded at 200 samples/s. Offline data analysis was performed in Matlab. The continuous data were low-pass filtered (1 Hz) and then divided into epochs. As in previous studies, the SCR amplitude on each trial was computed as the peak amplitude in the 0.5 to 4.5 s time window following CS onset minus the average amplitude in the 0.5 s prior to CS onset. Thus, SCR to the CSD+, CSP+, and CS− reflected changes in skin conductance level beyond changes in this measure produced by the preceding trial or task phase.
After square-root transformation, the data were analyzed in a 2 (cue type: drug, pleasant) × 3 (learning phase: acquisition, day 1 extinction, day 2 extinction) × 2 (group: cocaine users, controls) mixed analysis of variance (ANOVA) on the differential SCR values (CSD+ versus CS− and CSP+ versus CS−). Considering that we expected across- as well as within-session learning, the ANOVA was restricted to all unpaired trials during acquisition and the last half of all extinction trials on day 1 and day 2. Due to artifacts in the SCR signal, the subsample with complete SCR data for all three learning phases consisted of n=11 cocaine users and n=6 controls. Hence, our SCR analyses comparing the diagnostic groups across the learning phases were only powered to detect large effects (specifically, d≥0.68).
Image Acquisition & Analysis.
Functional images were acquired with a 4T Varian/Siemens MRI scanner using a coronal T2*-weighted single shot gradient-echo EPI sequence (TE/TR=20/1600 ms, 3.125×3.125 mm2 in-plane resolution, 4 mm slice thickness, 1 mm gap, 33 coronal slices, 20 cm FOV, 64×64 matrix size, 90°-flip angle, 200 kHz bandwidth with ramp sampling). Image processing and analyses were performed in SPM8 (Wellcome Trust Centre for Neuroimaging, London UK). The data were first realigned, co-registered, and spatially normalized to a standard EPI template in the Montreal Neurological Institute (MNI) frame, resulting in a final voxel size of 3×3×3 mm. Criteria for acceptable motion were ≤2 mm translation or ≤2 degrees rotation in any direction. The data were spatially smoothed with an 8 mm full-width-at-half-maximum Gaussian kernel.
Three random-effects general linear models (GLMs) were specified for each participant, corresponding to acquisition, day 1 extinction, and day 2 extinction, each with a session-specific intercept, the 6 motion parameters as regressors of no interest, and all task conditions convolved with a canonical HRF and high-pass filter (cut-off frequency: 1/1500 s). The GLM for acquisition included trial onsets for each CS (CSD+, CSP+, and CS−), separately for paired and unpaired trials (6 conditions in total), modeled as epochs with duration equal to the length of CS presentation (3.5 s or 5 s; i.e., terminating when the US was presented). The GLMs for day 1 and day 2 extinction each included trial onsets for each CS (all unpaired trials, epoch duration=5 s). The GLM for day 1 extinction additionally included a fourth condition for the “reminder trials”. Beta maps were computed for each participant for each CS and learning phase.
Given that previous studies have identified a circuit centered on the VMPFC in extinction learning, and the VMPFC and striatum in the representation and updating of values including those for drug cues, we focused on these two regions, although exploratory whole-brain and targeted control region analyses were also performed (see Supporting Information). As with SCR, we conducted 2 (cue type) × 3 (learning phase) × 2 (group) mixed ANOVAs on the differential BOLD responses (CSD+ versus CS− and CSP+ versus CS−), our neural measure of the conditioned response, extracted as average beta estimates from unbiased regions of interest (ROIs). The full sample of N=33 participants was included in the fMRI analyses.
The striatum (entire caudate and putamen) ROI was anatomically defined in PickAtlas (ANSIR Laboratory; http://fmri.wfubmc.edu/software/PickAtlas). The VMPFC was defined as a 12-mm radius sphere centered on the coordinates reported in after transformation to MNI space (Talairach: x=±2, y=38, z=−3; MNI: x=±3, y=42, z=−12). The term VMPFC is used to describe a large, heterogeneous region of the medial prefrontal cortex that spans parts of the anterior cingulate cortex (anterior to the genu of the corpus callosum) and the medial orbitofrontal cortex, encompassing Brodmann areas (BAs) 25, ventral portions of 24 and 32, medial portion of 11, and ventral and medial portions of 10. The particular aspect of the VMPFC included in our ROI is the medial portion of BA 11 and the ventral portion of BA 10 (see inset in Figure 2), which has been linked to emotion regulation including the use of extinction strategies. In the anterior-posterior direction, our VMPFC ROI falls centrally, touching on posterior aspects traditionally linked to the representation of negative affect and anterior aspects representing positive affect. Notably, our ROI almost fully overlaps with the VMPFC locus identified in to represent value in diverse contexts. An initial analysis that included laterality as a factor revealed differential responses in the left vs. right VMPFC ROIs. Therefore, the ANOVAs reported were performed on averaged left and right side activation values for the striatum but not the VMPFC.