Title.
Acute D3 Antagonist GSK598809 Selectively Enhances Neural Response During Monetary Reward Anticipation in Drug and Alcohol Dependence.
Abstract.
Evidence suggests that disturbances in neurobiological mechanisms of reward and inhibitory control maintain addiction and provoke relapse during abstinence. Abnormalities within the dopamine system may contribute to these disturbances and pharmacologically targeting the D3 dopamine receptor (DRD3) is therefore of significant clinical interest. We used functional magnetic resonance imaging to investigate the acute effects of the DRD3 antagonist GSK598809 on anticipatory reward processing, using the monetary incentive delay task (MIDT), and response inhibition using the Go/No-Go task (GNGT). A double-blind, placebo-controlled, crossover design approach was used in abstinent alcohol dependent, abstinent poly-drug dependent and healthy control volunteers. For the MIDT, there was evidence of blunted ventral striatal response to reward in the poly-drug-dependent group under placebo. GSK598809 normalized ventral striatal reward response and enhanced response in the DRD3-rich regions of the ventral pallidum and substantia nigra. Exploratory investigations suggested that the effects of GSK598809 were mainly driven by those with primary dependence on alcohol but not on opiates. Taken together, these findings suggest that GSK598809 may remediate reward deficits in substance dependence. For the GNGT, enhanced response in the inferior frontal cortex of the poly-drug group was found. However, there were no effects of GSK598809 on the neural network underlying response inhibition nor were there any behavioral drug effects on response inhibition. GSK598809 modulated the neural network underlying reward anticipation but not response inhibition, suggesting that DRD3 antagonists may restore reward deficits in addiction.
INTRODUCTION.
Evidence suggests dysregulation of neurobiological networks involved in reward processing and inhibitory control contributes to the risk and maintenance of addiction and relapse during abstinence. Disturbances in reward functioning involve hyporesponsivity to non-drug reward, which is associated with increased craving, drug use, and brain response to drug-related stimuli. Failures of impulse control across a range of domains have been a consistent finding in addiction and are associated with relapse. fMRI studies implicate reduced recruitment of lateral and medial prefrontal regions in impaired impulse control, although enhanced recruitment has been found in those who have successfully achieved abstinence from cocaine.
Abnormalities in reward and impulse control may be effects of blunted dopamine signaling in addiction. Reductions in dopamine release and receptor density are associated with increased drug use and craving and may precede the development of addiction. Dopamine has a pivotal role in reward-related behaviors, mediating reward learning and ‘incentive salience’ of reward stimuli. Deficits in dopamine neurotransmission may impair impulse control, as low striatal D2/D3 binding is associated with increased impulsivity in rodents and humans. Drugs increasing extracellular dopamine improve response inhibition in cocaine and alcohol dependence. These lines of evidence suggest that increasing brain dopamine may be a useful therapeutic strategy for addiction.
The D3 receptor (DRD3) is preferentially expressed within ventral striatal and limbic brain regions involved in reward processing. In vitro studies demonstrate the highest density of DRD3s within the ventral striatum of the human brain, whereas in vivo human positron emission tomography (PET) studies demonstrated maximal DRD3 density within the ventral pallidum (VP), followed by the substantia nigra (SN) and ventral striatum (VS), with lower levels in thalamus and dorsal striatum. Exposure to drugs of abuse results in upregulation of DRD3 in rodent models of addiction. Upregulated DRD3 density has been found within the VS and SN in a postmortem study of cocaine dependence while upregulated nigral DRD3s correlated positively with impulsivity and risky decision making in stimulant dependence. Trends for upregulated ventral pallidal DRD3 have been found in both alcohol dependence and heavy stimulant use. Consequently, there is much interest in this receptor as a target for drug therapy.
DRD3 antagonists have shown promise in preclinical studies, reducing self-administration, cue-induced drug-seeking, and conditioned place preference. In clinical populations, the novel DRD3 antagonist GSK598809 transiently reduced craving in nicotine dependence and attentional bias for food cues in low restrained eaters. The exact mechanism by which DRD3 antagonists achieve these effects is currently unknown, although there is evidence that the DRD3 is an autoreceptor controlling the synthesis and release of dopamine. Blockade of DRD3 with GSK598809 may therefore increase extra-synaptic dopamine.
The ICCAM Platform study is a multicenter research study that aimed to (1) identify brain networks underlying addiction to alcohol, cocaine, and opiates and relapse vulnerability and (2) identify potential new treatments for addiction based on their ability to modulate these networks. Here we present the effects of GSK598809 on networks underlying the anticipation of reward, using the monetary incentive delay task (MIDT) and response inhibition using the Go/No-Go task (GNGT). We hypothesized that reward and inhibitory control disturbances would be found in abstinent drug-dependent individuals and that GSK598809 would mitigate such disturbances.
MATERIALS AND METHODS.
Participants.
Participants were recruited as part of the ICCAM multicenter study. Detailed description of recruitment and participant characteristics are described elsewhere. Briefly, substance-dependent individuals were recruited according to the following criteria: aged 20–64 years, meeting DSM-IV (American Psychiatric Association, 2000) criteria for current or prior alcohol, cocaine or opiate dependence, abstinent for at least 4 weeks, free from any current primary axis-1 mental health disorder, no history of severe enduring mental illness, no psychoactive medications, no serious physical health problems, no neurological disease, and no contraindications for MRI scanning. Healthy controls (HC) were recruited according to the same criteria except that they had no current or history of dependence to any drug except nicotine.
Eighty-eight participants completed both placebo and GSK598809 sessions: a HC group (n=35), an abstinent alcohol-dependent (AD) (n=20) and an abstinent poly-drug-dependent (PD) group (n=33). Five people were excluded from the MID analysis, and 14 from the GNG analysis leaving final Ns of 83 and 74, respectively (see Supplementary Materials for details).
The HC group was matched with the AD and PD groups for age, sex, smoking status, and handedness and additionally with the AD group, but not the PD group, for IQ and years of education (see Supplementary Tables S1 and S2). AD and PD groups differed significantly for age for the MID analysis, with a trend for a difference for the GNG analysis (p=0.06).
Procedures and Tasks.
Procedures are described in detail elsewhere. Briefly, the ICCAM study involved five separate scanning sessions (one screening, including fMRI scanning to familiarize participants with the scanner environment and tasks, and four drug testing sessions). Placebo and GSK598809 (60 mg) were administered in a double-blind manner with a crossover design. Owing to concerns over study dropout and loss of placebo data, a weighted randomization was used with the placebo session administered in study session 2 or 3, whereas GSK598809 was administered in session 4 or 5 (with the other two sessions testing other drugs as part of the ICCAM platform). The mean (SD) inter-session interval between placebo and GSK598809 sessions was 34.39 days (40.91) (MIDT) and 36.15 days (42.72) (GNGT), with no difference between groups; MID (F(2.80)=0.25, p=0.78), GNG (F(2,71)=0.03, p=0.98).
Scans occurred 2 h after administration of drug or placebo and tasks were practiced before scanning. All participants had an alcohol breathalyzer reading of 0.0%. Participants were urine screened. A positive test for cannabis was allowed owing to its long half-life provided there was no use in the previous week. Participants tested negative for all other drugs, with two allowed exceptions (see Supplementary Materials).
Tasks.
Both the MIDT and GNGT are described in detail within Supplementary Materials.
The MIDT was modified from and was designed to probe reward sensitivity. Participants could win or lose money (or neither win nor lose) depending upon how quickly they reacted to a target stimulus that was predicted by a win, loss, or neutral cue. The task was designed such that win accuracy would be 66% and £10 would be won at each session.
The GNGT was an event-related task adapted from, consisting of a series of letter Xs and letter Ys. Participants were instructed to respond as fast as they could to each letter (Go trial) except when the letter was the same as the previous letter (No-Go trial).
Analysis of Behavioral Data.
For the MIDT, reward-neutral reaction time (RT) was analyzed. For the GNGT, percentage accuracy for Go trials and No-Go trials and RT for Go trials were analyzed. All analyses used mixed ANOVAs with drug session as the within-subject factor and group as the between-subject factor. Age was included as a mean-adjusted covariate in all analyses.
Analysis of fMRI Data.
Details of data acquisition and preprocessing are in Supplementary Materials.
For the MIDT, analysis focused on the ‘cue and anticipation’ phase and was modeled as a mini-block beginning at the cue onset and ending at the onset of the target stimulus (see Supplementary Materials for details). The contrast of interest is the average of the ‘reward cue anticipation’ compared with ‘neutral cue anticipation’ across both runs.
For the GNGT, successful inhibitions of No-Go trials (‘stops’) and unsuccessful No-Gos (‘errors’) were modeled against an implicit baseline of Go trials. Stops that were preceded by a Go trial that also did not have a response were considered ‘fake inhibitions’ and were modeled separately as conditions of no-interest. The task was powered to look at ‘stops’ rather than ‘errors’, therefore only the ‘stops>go’ contrast is explored further.
Realignment parameters and movement outliers (scan-to-scan displacement of >3 mm) were added to the models as nuisance regressors.
A region of interest (ROI) approach was used. ROIs of the VS, VP, and SN were chosen for the MIDT owing to their key roles in reward processing and evidence of abnormalities within these regions in addiction. Additionally, as reviewed above, these regions are particularly rich in DRD3s and therefore are potential targets for GSK598809 effects. For the GNGT, bilateral inferior frontal gyri (IFG) and anterior cingulate cortex were chosen owing to their key role in motor inhibition and abnormal recruitment in addiction. While not key ROIs for this task, exploratory investigations were also carried out with the DRD3-rich regions of VS, VP, and SN.
Mean reward-neutral (MID) and stop-go (GNG) contrast estimates were extracted from the relevant ROIs for each participant and entered into mixed ANOVAs (see Supplementary Materials for details). A Bonferroni’s correction for the three regions investigated for each task was applied, with significance set at p<0.017. Additional exploratory whole-brain investigations were carried out using a voxel-wise threshold of p<0.05, Family-Wise Error Corrected (see Figure 1 for ROIs and Supplementary Materials for further details).
Correlational analyses were additionally carried out to investigate the relationships between ROI brain response and performance, reward and impulsivity variables, ROI brain response and duration of abstinence, and drug effects on ROI response and performance (see Supplementary Materials for details). Twenty-nine analyses were carried out and Bonferroni-corrected significance was set at p<0.0017.