Title.
Blunted ventral striatal responses to anticipated rewards foreshadow problematic drug use in novelty-seeking adolescents.
Abstract.
Novelty-seeking tendencies in adolescents may promote innovation as well as problematic impulsive behaviour, including drug abuse. Previous research has not clarified whether neural hyper- or hypo-responsiveness to anticipated rewards promotes vulnerability in these individuals. Here we use a longitudinal design to track 144 novelty-seeking adolescents at age 14 and 16 to determine whether neural activity in response to anticipated rewards predicts problematic drug use. We find that diminished BOLD activity in mesolimbic (ventral striatal and midbrain) and prefrontal cortical (dorsolateral prefrontal cortex) regions during reward anticipation at age 14 predicts problematic drug use at age 16. Lower psychometric conscientiousness and steeper discounting of future rewards at age 14 also predicts problematic drug use at age 16, but the neural responses independently predict more variance than psychometric measures. Together, these findings suggest that diminished neural responses to anticipated rewards in novelty-seeking adolescents may increase vulnerability to future problematic drug use.
Some adolescents seek novelty, but it is unknown whether the brain circuits underlying this behaviour can be used to predict later, problematic behaviour. Here, authors show that diminished ventral striatal and prefrontal activity in response to anticipated rewards at age 14 in these individuals predicts problematic drug use at age 16.
Individual differences in novelty seeking are associated with impulsive choice (or a preference for smaller but sooner over larger but later rewards). Specifically, novelty-seeking traits in adolescents can foreshadow later problematic behaviours including excessive drug use. Novelty seeking, in general, and impulsive choice, in particular, may recruit distinct neural systems that include a motivational circuit comprising mesolimbic dopamine projections from the ventral tegmental area of the midbrain to the ventral striatum (VS) as well as a countervailing cognitive control circuit comprising prefrontal cortical (PFC) regions. The balance of activity in these circuits may shift over development, consistent with evidence for earlier development of the motivational circuit than the cognitive control circuit in humans. Since dopaminergic modulation of these circuits can influence both motivation and cognitive control, delays in the development of these circuits and their relative activity could increase impulsive choice, including drug use.
Theoretical accounts differ, however, with respect to exactly how activity in these motivational and control circuits can influence impulsive choice in adolescents. On the one hand, impulsive choice in adolescents has been attributed to diminished motivation, such that drug abuse may reflect attempts to compensate for motivational deficits. Support for this account has come from neuroimaging studies, suggesting that adolescents show diminished responses during anticipation of monetary rewards relative to adults, which are more pronounced in adolescents with contemporaneous drug use. On the other hand, impulsive behaviour in adolescents has also been attributed to excessive motivation, which could magnify the impact of received rewards and fuel subsequent impulsive choice. Support for this countervailing view comes from neuroimaging studies, indicating that adolescents show enhanced responses to monetarily rewarding outcomes relative to adults. More recent integrations of these findings can resolve these apparent discrepancies by clarifying that adolescents show both diminished responses during reward anticipation, as well as increased responses to reward outcomes, relative to adults.
For novelty-seeking adolescents, impulsive choices may confer benefits as well as costs. Although novelty-seeking adolescents have been labelled as ‘reckless', ‘stupid', ‘irrational', ‘callous', ‘lazy' or even ‘violent', novelty seeking could confer either proximal or distal advantages. For instance, novelty seeking encourages emigration away from relatives (which minimizes inbreeding), and can facilitate discovery and exploration of new opportunities and behaviours that might prove useful later in life. Novelty seeking may also increase self-esteem when valued by peers, since peer influence increases over adolescence. Finally, novelty seeking can elevate reproductive success in competitive environments in other species as well as humans, since others might perceive willingness to pursue novel options as a marker of ability. For instance, in business, novelty seeking has been associated with creativity, entrepreneurial initiative and commercial success.
Thus, while novelty-seeking behaviour can both harm and help adolescents, it is currently unclear how or when novelty-seeking traits promote pathology versus promise. In this research, we used a longitudinal design to identify which neural and behavioural factors predispose novelty-seeking adolescents to harmful outcomes specifically related to problematic drug use (PDU). This design could reveal whether functional or structural neural markers at age 14 preceded PDU at age 16. We targeted motivational circuitry using a variant of a well-established neuroimaging task that reliably indexes individual differences in neural activity during reward anticipation (that is, the Monetary Incentive Delay Task). Previous research has associated mesolimbic activity during reward anticipation with dopamine release as well as craving for drugs of abuse. The current longitudinal design allowed us to test whether novelty-seeking adolescents with decreased neural responses during reward anticipation would be more likely to develop PDU (defined as the intake of increased amounts of licit and/or illicit drugs) over 2 years later. This design also afforded a direct comparison of neural versus psychometric predictors of PDU. Based on previous findings implicating blunted neural responses during reward anticipation in adolescents with contemporaneous PDU, we hypothesized that decreased neural responses during reward anticipation might predict eventual PDU in novelty-seeking adolescents, and further, that these neural markers might augment predictions afforded by more conventional psychometric measures.
Consistent with these hypotheses, we find that novelty-seeking adolescents who go on to develop PDU initially show reduced neural activity during reward anticipation (specifically, in the midbrain, VS and dorsolateral prefrontal cortex). These differences in neural activity cannot be accounted for by volumetric changes, and augment (or even exceed) predictions afforded by more conventional psychometric trait measures (specifically, temporal discounting and low conscientiousness). In the future, neural markers of susceptibility to PDU may help researchers and clinicians to better target problematic symptoms and vulnerable individuals for intervention.
Methods.
Subjects.
Data for this study came from the IMAGEN project, and were collected at multiple sites across Europe. At age 14, a large cohort of adolescents completed self-report and interview measures, in addition to structural and fMRI scans. Parental report measures were also collected for some constructs. Local ethics research committees approved the study at each site. On the day of assessment, written consent was obtained from each parent or guardian, and verbal assent was obtained from each adolescent. Further details on recruitment, standardized instructions for administration of psychometric and cognitive behavioural measures, and other procedures are described in the Standard Operating Procedures for the IMAGEN project (http://www.imagen-europe.com/en/Publications_and_SOP.php). Subjects were included in the current study if they had valid data for all measures including the initial assessment at age 14 and follow-up at age 16 (see below). Based on these criteria, at the time of analysis, complete data were available for 1,090 adolescents.
Novelty seeking in this sample was initially assessed with the Novelty Seeking subscale of the Temperament and Character Inventory—Revised. From the original sample of 1,090 with full data sets, individuals scoring in the top 25th percentile (n=283) of novelty seeking at the initial assessment at age 14 were selected. Based on the criteria described below, these subjects were then classified either as having PDU either at age 14 (excluded; n=20) or at age 16 (PDU group; n=72) or as not having PDU at either ages 14 or 16 (control group; n=191). Since we aimed to classify whether neural markers predict or result from drug use, we sought to directly compare the PDU group to the control group without statistically significant differences in PDU at age 14. Thus, we further matched both groups with respect to size and average drug intake at age 14 (as defined by each individual's total drug intake score, described below). This procedure yielded 72 subjects in the PDU group and 72 matched subjects in the control group (Table 1; Fig. 5).
PDU criteria.
PDU was operationally defined based on measures according to the European School Survey Project on Alcohol and Other Drugs (ESPAD). Unlike traditional clinical instruments (for example, the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, version 5) these measures provided a preclinical index of drug use at ages 14 and 16. Thus, cutoff criteria for PDU were defined to capture problematic use of various legal or illicit drugs. With respect to legal drugs (alcohol and cigarettes), a threshold was set that indicated daily use. In particular, a score of 3 or higher on smoking (0: ‘Not at all', 1: ‘Less than 1 cigarette per week', 2: ‘Less than 1 cigarette per day', 3: ‘1–5 cigarettes per day', 4: ‘6–10 cigarettes per day', 5: ‘11–20 cigarettes per day', 6: ‘More than 20 cigarettes per day') and a score of 5 or higher on alcohol consumption (0: ‘0 drinks per month', 1: ‘1–2 drinks per month', 2: ‘3–5 drinks per month', 3: ‘6–9', 4: ‘10–19', 5: ‘20–39' and 6: ‘40 or more') within the last 30 days were defined as PDU.
With respect to illicit drugs, PDU thresholds were based on lifetime use. Apart from cannabis, where the threshold was set to 39 lifetime occasions, the threshold for other drugs (glue, tranquilizers, amphetamine, lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD), hallucinogenic mushrooms, 3,4 methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA), ketamine or liquid ecstasy) was set to 3–5 occasions or more. Use of a lifetime score and therefore a lower threshold criterion for these drugs was justified by the fact that early use of these drugs robustly predicts PDU later in life (for example, a threefold risk after early cannabis use). Finally, the threshold for illicit drugs (for example, crack, cocaine, heroin and narcotics) was set to 1–2 or more occasions (Supplementary Figs 5 and 6 depict the distribution of scores for both groups at age 14 and 16, and cutoffs for each substance). None of the subjects in either group fell above the threshold for use of any substance at age 14 (Supplementary Fig. 5). Furthermore, most subjects were classified as PDU by means of daily cigarette use, followed by alcohol and cannabis—only a few were classified as PDU based on their use of other illicit drugs (for example, MDMA and amphetamines; Supplementary Figs 5 and 6).
Personality and psychopathology measures.
Novelty seeking was assessed using a subscale of the Temperament and Character Inventory—Revised. Dimensions of personality were assessed using the 60-item Neuroticism-Extraversion-Openness Five-Factor Inventory, which indexes dimensions of Extraversion, Agreeableness, Conscientiousness, Neuroticism, and Openness to Experience, as described by the Five-Factor Model of personality. Adolescent psychiatric symptoms and their impact were assessed with the Development and Well-Being Assessment, which generates probabilities that individuals qualify for Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (version 4) psychiatric diagnoses.
Cognitive measures.
Subjects completed a version of the Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children-IV, which included the Perceptual Reasoning, Matrix Reasoning and Similarities, and Vocabulary scales to index intelligence. The Monetary-Choice Questionnaire (MCQ) was administered to assess delay discounting—or individual differences in the tendency to choose sooner but smaller over later but larger rewards (this index correlates well with more precise but also more time-consuming measures). Subjects also completed the Cambridge Gambling Task (CGT), as a behavioural measure of risk seeking.
Demographics.
The Puberty Development Scale assessed each subject's pubertal status. Socioeconomic status scores were assessed using a composite score that indexed the weighted sum of the following variables: Mother's Education Score, Father's Education Score, Family Stress Unemployment Score, Financial Difficulties Score, Home Inadequacy Score, Neighborhood Score, Financial Crisis Score, Mother Employed Score, Father Employed Score. Negative (that is, high risk) scores were reverse-coded.
Functional neuroimaging data acquisition and analysis.
The task used to probe neural activity during reward anticipation was a modified version of the MID task, which required subjects to respond after seeing a cue to a briefly presented target by pressing one of two buttons as rapidly as possible to indicate whether the target appeared on the left or the right side of the screen (Fig. 6). If subjects responded while the target was on the screen, they received points, but if they responded before or after the target's disappearance, they received no points. Cues signalled each trial's onset, and reliably indicated the position of the target as well as the number of points to be awarded for a successful response. Cues took one of three forms: a triangle indicated no points (‘No Gain'), a circle with one line indicated 2 points (‘Small Gain') and a circle with three lines indicated 10 points (‘Large Gain') at stake. Behavioural data from this modified MID task included the proportion of hits on gain trials and hit reaction times.
At all sites, scanning was performed with 3 T whole-body magnetic resonance scanners produced by a variety of manufacturers (Siemens, Philips, General Electric and Bruker). For functional imaging, we acquired 300 volumes with 40 slices in descending order (2.4 mm slice thickness with 1 mm gap) using a gradient-echo T2*-weighted pulse sequence (EPI). The time to repetition for volume acquisition was set to 2,200 ms and the time to echo to 30 ms. In-plane resolution was 64 × 64 with a field of view of 220 × 220 mm. The plane of acquisition was tilted to parallel the anterior–posterior commissure line. For anatomical reference, a three-dimensional magnetization prepared gradient-echo sequence of the whole brain was obtained with time to repetition of 6.8 ms and a time to echo of 3.2 ms. These imaging parameters were chosen to ensure comparability of data across different scanners. Further details of the image acquisition protocols and quality control procedures have been described previously, including an extensive period of standardization across magnetic resonance scanners.
Image preprocessing and analyses were performed with SPM8 and SPM12 software (Wellcome Trust Centre for Neuroimaging, London). For structural preprocessing, we normalized individually segmented T1-weighted scans to a template generated by the first 552 adolescents in the sample using the DARTEL toolbox as implemented in SPM8. For fMRI whole-brain analyses, single-subject echo-planar images were coregistered with their associated T1-weighted structural images. Functional images were then realigned and resliced to the first volume. Single-subject statistical models analysed the resliced data using the following regressors: (1) anticipation of large gain; (2) anticipation of small gain; (3) anticipation of no gain; (4) feedback indicating large gain; (5) feedback indicating small gain; (6) and feedback indicating no gain. Each regressor was defined separately for successful (that is, ‘hits') as well as unsuccessful (that is, ‘misses') response trials. Thus, each model included a total of 12 orthogonal regressors. Trials in which subjects failed to respond were modelled similarly but separately as error trials. Rigid body movement parameters from the realignment procedure were included as six additional covariates. Next, contrast images of the parameter estimates were created for each subject. The present analyses focused on the gain anticipation phase. Analyses specifically contrasted neural responses during anticipation of large versus small gain, since motor responses did not differ across incentivized conditions between groups (but were slightly lower in vulnerable subjects for no gain trials; Table 1). Single-subject contrast images were created by applying the DARTEL deformations to the contrast images, which were subsequently smoothed with a Gaussian kernel of 8 mm full width at half maximum. Normalized and smoothed single-subject contrast images were then entered into a second-level random-effects analysis (two-sample t-test contrasting PDU subjects versus controls). Although both groups were matched for gender, pubertal status, intelligence estimate, ESPAD composite score, novelty-seeking score and scanning site at the first assessment, we included those variables as covariates to account for residual variance between and within groups. For whole-brain analyses, which were primarily intended to verify main effects of the neuroimaging task across groups and group differences in predicted regions, the threshold was set to P<0.05, corrected for multiple comparisons.
For targeted analyses that tested the critical hypotheses, bilateral ventral striatal spherical (12 mm diameter) volumes of interest (VOIs) were centred on Montreal Neurological Institute coordinates ±14, 8, –8 (ref.), as documented in previous research on reward anticipation. Similarly, bilateral midbrain spherical (12 mm diameter) VOIs were centred on coordinates ±9, –15, –15 (ref.), as documented in previous research on reward anticipation. Bilateral dorsolateral PFC spherical (40 mm diameter) VOIs were centred on coordinates ±35, 36, 32 (ref.), based on previous research on executive control. Tests for associations of activity in these VOIs at age 14 with eventual PDU versus healthy status at age 16 were Bonferroni-corrected for multiple comparisons (P<0.05/6=P<0.008). In figures, results are displayed at a threshold of P<0.005 uncorrected with clusters including at least 10 contiguous voxels and projected onto the mean structural scan of all subjects, but these VOIs are superimposed for visualization purposes (Figs 2, 3, 4). Since the average adolescent brain at age 14 is smaller than the adult brain, we refrained from transforming individual brains into adult MNI space. However, since the predictions came from studies that reported data in MNI space, we estimated the parameters for linear transformation from MNI space to the space of our DARTEL template (that is, X=0.892,·XMNI=−0.008,·YMNI=+0.004,·ZMNI=+0.385; Y=0.017,·XMNI=+0.930,·YMNI=+0.025,·ZMNI=−6.799; Z=0.009,·XMNI=−0.005,·YMNI=+0.838,·ZMNI=−0.093).
Structural neuroimaging data analysis.
Voxel-based morphometry analyses compared spatially normalized structural scans on a voxel-by-voxel basis. Instead of directly comparing image intensity, however, structural scans were segmented into grey and white matter, smoothed, and then the grey matter partition was subjected to a voxel-by-voxel statistical test. Thus, T1 images were segmented using the ‘new segment' routine as implemented in SPM8, then modulated and spatially normalized with DARTEL (see above). Resulting images were smoothed with a Gaussian kernel of 8 mm full width at half maximum. Statistical analyses mirrored those applied to the fMRI contrasts (that is, two-sample t-test contrasting PDU subjects versus controls, with gender, pubertal status, intelligence quotient estimate, ESPAD score, novelty-seeking score and scanning site entered as covariates of no interest). Targeted analyses compared grey matter density within the same VOIs that were constructed to compare functional activity.
Behavioural and neural prediction of PDU.
After verifying key psychometric and neural variables at age 14, these variables' relative ability to predict problematic abuse at age 16 was evaluated using a series of logistic regression models that included psychometric variables only, neural variables only (maximum peaks from VOIs), and the combination of psychometric and neural variables. Since data checks of pair-wise correlations revealed that activity in midbrain and bilateral ventral striatal VOIs was highly correlated (Supplementary Fig. 7), and based on previous evidence reliably implicating ventral striatal activity in reward anticipation, we included coefficients for the right ventral striatal VOI in the models. Similarly, since activity in the two dorsolateral prefrontal VOIs was highly correlated, the prefrontal region whose activity was most closely associated with future PDU was included in the models. This initial variable selection averted collinearity and resulting instability that might arise from including highly correlated variables in the same model. Cross-validation analyses verified that these variables could classify future PDU out of sample in each model. Classification was determined using 10-fold cross-validation over fits of a linear support vector machine, with 50% classification representing chance.
Data availability.
Data are available via application to the IMAGEN project (http://www.imagen-europe.com).
Additional information.
How to cite this article: Büchel, C. et al. Blunted ventral striatal responses to anticipated rewards foreshadow problematic drug use in novelty-seeking adolescents. Nat. Commun. 8, 14140 doi: 10.1038/ncomms14140 (2017).
Publisher's note: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.