Title.
A preliminary study of longitudinal neuroadaptation associated with recovery from addiction.
Abstract.
Background.
Few studies have explored longitudinal change in event-related brain responses during early recovery from addiction. Moreover, existing findings yield evidence of both increased and decreased signaling within reward and control centers over time. The current study explored reward- and control-related signals in a risky decision-making task and specifically investigated parametric modulations of the BOLD signal, rather than signal magnitude alone. It was hypothesized that risk-related signals during decision-making and outcome evaluation would reflect recovery and that change in specific signals would correspond with improved treatment outcomes.
Methods.
Twenty-one substance dependent individuals were recruited upon enrollment in community-based substance use treatment programs, wherein they received treatment-as-usual. Participants completed functional neuroimaging assessments at baseline and 3-month follow-up while performing the Balloon Analogue Risk Task (BART). Risk- and reward-sensitive signals were identified using parametric modulators. Substance use was tracked throughout the 3-month study interval using the timeline follow-back procedure.
Results.
Longitudinal contrasts of parametric modulators suggested improved formation of risk-informed outcome expectations at follow-up. Specifically, a greater response to high risk (low-likelihood) positive feedback was identified in caudal anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) and a greater response to low risk (low-likelihood) negative feedback was identified in caudal ACC and inferior frontal gyrus. In addition, attenuation of a ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC) “reward-seeking” signal (i.e., increasing response with greater reward) during risky decisions at follow-up was associated with less substance use during the study interval.
Conclusions.
Changes in risk- and reward-related signaling in ACC/vmPFC appear to reflect recovery and may support sobriety.
1. Introduction.
Changes within primary reward circuitry and prefrontal control networks underlie the neurobiological instantiation of substance use disorders (SUDs), resulting in a disturbance of salience attribution and response inhibition that drives compulsive use. Interventions for SUDs should restore functioning within these neural systems, but few studies explore longitudinal neuroadaptation during early recovery.
In a recent meta-analysis, both pharmacologic and cognitive-behavioral interventions affected the ventral striatum, orbitofrontal cortex, and inferior frontal gyrus (IFG) – regions associated with reward-learning, reward-seeking, and response inhibition, respectively. Cognitive-behavioral interventions also recruited control-related brain areas (e.g., anterior cingulate cortex (ACC), posterior cingulate cortex (PCC), and middle frontal gyrus) – suggesting an added benefit of these approaches. Konova et al. primarily considered acute treatment effects and were unable to target neuroadaptive change over the longer term because few longitudinal neuroimaging studies have been conducted.
A few studies have explored longitudinal change in brain function during recovery from SUDs. studied a mixed sample of substance dependent individuals (SDIs) receiving treatment-as-usual (with or without adjunctive cognitive-behavioral therapy) and found improved Stroop performance and reduced control-related activation in regions including ACC, IFG, and midbrain following 8 weeks of treatment – consistent with enhanced processing efficiency in these regions. Increased activation has also been reported following treatment for cocaine dependence in midbrain and thalamus – both in response to neutral and drug Stroop stimuli and during reward anticipation in a monetary incentive delay task. Moeller et al. also identified a trend toward increased ACC activation to drug words, specifically. Taken together, these results suggest restoration of dopaminergic neurotransmission within the midbrain and improved recruitment and/or efficiency of dopaminergically-innervated regions associated with cognitive control and motivational salience.
also report a relationship between increased midbrain activity at follow-up, reduced drug-seeking in a simulated cocaine choice paradigm, and fewer days of use during recovery – while increased dorsolateral prefrontal cortex activity was associated with less spending on cocaine during treatment. also found that an increased midbrain response at follow-up was associated with reduced use, while a greater ventral striatum response during loss anticipation was associated with fewer negative urine drug screens. Correlations with treatment outcome were also explored by but no significant effects were identified.
Despite the apparent importance of decision-making in substance use recovery, no previous work has addressed change in reward- and control-related signaling in this context. The current study specifically targeted recovery-related change in neural activation during risky decision-making in a mixed sample of SDIs during the three months following treatment engagement. Specifically, the Balloon Analogue Risk Task (BART) was selected due to its good test-retest reliability, external validity with respect to real-life risky behavior (including substance use), and existing framework for disentangling reward-seeking, loss aversion, and infrequency effects, previously developed by our lab (please see; for details).
Our previous work identified BART-related activation in mPFC/ACC that was associated with uncontrolled substance use and substance abuse risk factors in alcohol-using undergraduates. Specifically, high-risk substance use was associated with reduced mPFC/ACC signal in relation to increasingly risky decision-making and increased mPFC/ACC signal in relation to unexpected, high-risk reward. This is consistent with the notion that control-related mPFC/ACC activity biases decisions away from riskier options and signals predictions errors based on risk appraisal.
We specifically hypothesized that individuals with improved recovery outcomes would exhibit remediation of these event-related signals over time (i.e., increased mPFC/ACC activity during risky decision-making and reduced signal to high-risk reward). Further, unlike previous longitudinal imaging studies of recovery, the current study investigated parametric modulations of the BOLD response that reflect dynamic sensitivity to task context (specifically, trial-to-trial variation in risk and reward). Such signals provide unique insight into the neural representation of relapse-relevant constructs (e.g., reward sensitivity, loss aversion) and may be robust to changes in processing efficiency that complicate interpretation of findings from main effect contrasts.
2. Methods.
2.1. Participants and design.
Twenty-six SDIs were enrolled upon treatment engagement at one of two community-based clinics; 21 completed baseline and follow-up assessments and are included in the current sample (6 female; see Table 1 for demographic and recruitment data). Participants were (1) diagnosed with alcohol, drug, or polysubstance dependence using DSM-IV criteria, (2) 18–50 years of age, (3) 1–4 weeks abstinent at time of baseline assessment, and (4) actively participating in substance use treatment. Individuals receiving replacement pharmacotherapy and those reporting contraindications to magnetic resonance imaging or a history of traumatic brain injury, other neurocognitive disorders, Bipolar disorder, or psychotic illness were excluded.
Participants received treatment-as-usual in an intensive outpatient or residential treatment program. Both programs were abstinence-oriented and utilized a twelve-step facilitation approach, as well as routine urinalysis (see Supplementary materials for additional details). Participants completed a baseline assessment and follow-up fMRI assessment at 3-months. The timeline follow-back procedure was conducted at monthly intervals to track drug and alcohol use during the 3-month period and additional narrative details (e.g., subjective intoxication) were also collected (see Supplementary materials for additional information). A breathalyzer test (AlcoSensor IV, Intoximeters, Inc., St. Louis, MO) and 6-panel urine drug screen (Alere Toxicology, Portsmouth, VA) were conducted prior to baseline and 3-month assessments. Participants who resumed use during the study were required to maintain abstinence for 48 h prior to testing and were evaluated for signs of intoxication. Study assessments were not conducted if urinalysis results were positive for recent substance use or blood alcohol content was greater than 0.000 percent by volume. Two participants screened positive for use at 3-month follow-up; both were rescheduled and completed this assessment after providing negative urine specimen and breathalyzer results.
Lifetime problems with alcohol and other substances were assessed at baseline using the Semi-structured Assessment for the Genetics of Alcoholism. Data from the timeline follow-back were used to compute a substance use metric (SUM),1 summarizing days of use (with and without intoxication) for each participant; values were arcsine-transformed to better approximate the normal distribution. Additional self-report (including measures of social investment, craving, anxiety, depression, and coping) and cognitive-behavioral (i.e., Go/No-Go, Delay Discounting, and Brown-Peterson tasks) measures of recovery are described in Supplementary materials and Supplementary Table 1.
2.2. fMRI procedure.
Imaging datasets were acquired at baseline and 3-month follow-up using a Siemens Magnetom Trio 3-T MRI scanner and 32-channel head coil. We used a version of the BART (see Fig. 1), previously validated in neuroimaging studies of healthy individuals, substance users, and at-risk youth, developed from the original implementation of the BART for fMRI and utilizing a similar analytic approach. Acquisition parameters were identical to those used in and are reported in Supplementary materials. Stimuli were presented using E-Prime (Psychology Software Tools, Pittsburgh, PA) and a projector to display images within the scanner bore. Each inflation sequence began with a small balloon, valued at $0.00, in the center of the screen. Participants could 'Inflate' the balloon, increasing its value in the next trial, or 'Redeem' the balloon for its current value by responding with left and right index fingers (assignment counterbalanced across participants). Each decision was preceded by a red rectangle, presented below the balloon for a pseudo-randomly-determined delay of 1.5, 2, or 2.5 s, signaling participants to withhold responses. The rectangle then turned green, indicating participants could respond when ready. Following response production, a jittered delay of 0–6 s preceded feedback such that decision and outcome intervals could be estimated separately in the general linear model (GLM).
After 'Redeem' responses, the words, “You Win!” were presented for 1 s ('Win') and the wager value was added to block winnings (visible at bottom of screen). After 'Inflate' responses, 'Success' was signaled by an increased wager value and balloon size, cueing the start of the next decision trial. Alternatively, an 'Explode' outcome (resulting in loss of the current wager) was signaled by presentation of an exploding balloon for 500 ms and the words, “You Lose!” for 1 s. An equiprobable delay of 2, 4, or 6 s preceded new inflation sequences, signaled by presentation of a new $0.00 balloon after 'Win' and 'Explode' events. Explosion probability and reward increased in parallel with each inflation, in accordance with values specified in Table 2. Participants were informed that both wager value and explosion probability increased with consecutive inflations; the rate of increase was not described. Participants completed two 8-min blocks per timepoint, each with an average of 17 inflation sequences (SD = 2) and 96 decisions (SD = 9) per block; participants were unaware that the number of balloons per block was unlimited.
Winnings were reset at the beginning of each block; participants received a monetary bonus equal to 25% of total earnings at each timepoint. While it was possible for participants to produce a different number of events for entry into the first-level GLM at each timepoint, participants generated a similar number of events of each type (see Supplementary Table 2).
2.3. Preprocessing and analysis of neuroimaging data.
Preprocessing steps were identical to those reported by and are described in Supplementary materials. Functional images from both timepoints were coregistered to the high resolution structural from baseline. First- and second-level statistical analyses were conducted in SPM5. Event-related BOLD responses during the BART were estimated using a GLM with a global constant and 20 regressors for each timepoint (baseline vs. follow-up): six motion regressors, two constant terms, five basic (i.e., main effect) event regressors (i.e., 'Redeem', 'Inflate', 'Explode', 'Success', and 'Win'), five parametric modulators representing explosion probability for each event, and 2 parametric modulators representing response time (RT) for 'Redeem' and 'Inflate' events. A canonical hemodynamic response function was used to model BOLD response, with decision-related regressors time-locked to RT and outcome-related regressors time-locked to feedback latency.
Due to the relationship between risk and reward in the task, parametric modulators specified with reference to explosion probability also tracked trial-to-trial variation in reward magnitude. These parametrically-modulated regressors were identical to the five basic event regressors, except that the magnitude of each modeled event was multiplied by that event's explosion probability. Each parametrically-modulated regressor was mean-centered, so that the sum of regressor values across all time points was zero. For three participants, a lower occurrence of explosions precluded unique estimation of basic event regressors and parametric modulators for 'Explode' events; this was additionally the case for one participant for 'Win' events. These participants were accordingly excluded from parametric modulator contrasts of each corresponding type.
Given our hypotheses, only the five parametric modulators representing explosion probability (designated by '*p(Explode)') were considered in second-level analyses. We specifically explored longitudinal change in parametric modulators by computing longitudinal contrasts (i.e., 3-month follow-up – baseline, hereafter FU-BL) and evaluating these contrasts using one-sample t-tests to assess main effects and correlation analyses to assess longitudinal change related to substance use outcomes (represented by the SUM). Longitudinal contrasts were specified at the first-level and tested at the second-level with random effects to model between-subjects variance. To exclude effects related to behavior change between sessions, the difference in mean BART inflation number between acquisition sessions (FU-BL) was included as a nuisance covariate at the second-level. Reported p-values for second-level analyses reflect one-tailed tests of significance.
In order to test predictions from the Inflate*p(Explode) FU-BL contrast was specified to identify regions wherein longitudinal signal increased with escalating risk/reward during decision-making and the Success*p(Explode) FU-BL contrast was specified to identify regions with less signal to high-risk reward over time. Longitudinal contrasts were similarly specified for Explode*p(Explode), Win*p(Explode), and Redeem*p(Explode) parametric modulators.
Between-subject, whole-brain correlational analyses were conducted for longitudinal contrasts to identify regions wherein changes in task-related signal related to substance use outcomes (i.e., SUM). Negative correlations represent less use with increased parametrically-modulated event-related activation at follow-up, relative to baseline. Positive correlations indicate that increased parametrically-modulated signal at follow-up corresponded with more use.
We employed a whole brain search space to improve hypothesis-generating potential; however, our hypotheses specifically concerned mPFC/ACC, justifying small volume correction for that region. Clusters of 30 or more contiguous voxels, passing cluster-level correction at the 0.05 α-level (initial cluster-forming threshold of 0.001; cluster extent estimated using AFNI's 3dClustSim to achieve a type I error rate of 0.5%), were identified as regions of interest. Bonferroni correction was additionally applied for 10 whole brain correlations (5 positive and 5 negative longitudinal contrast correlations), lowering the cluster-corrected p-value to 0.005 for these comparisons. Correlation analyses were repeated following exclusion of participants with SUM scores exceeding 2 standard deviations of the mean to assess the influence of extreme values.
2.4. Cognitive-behavioral and self-report data.
Repeated-measures analysis of variance (ANOVA) was used to assess longitudinal change in BART performance, as well as self-report and cognitive-behavioral measures (see Supplementary materials). Pearson correlations between SUM values and longitudinal change in these variables were also calculated. Post hoc paired t-tests were utilized for comparison of specific conditions. Reported p-values reflect a two-tailed test of significance.