Title.
Aberrant salience network functional connectivity in auditory verbal hallucinations: a first episode psychosis sample.
Abstract.
Auditory verbal hallucinations (AVH) often lead to distress and functional disability, and are frequently associated with psychotic illness. Previously both state and trait magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) studies of AVH have identified activity in brain regions involving auditory processing, language, memory and areas of default mode network (DMN) and salience network (SN). Current evidence is clouded by research mainly in participants on long-term medication, with chronic illness and by choice of seed regions made ‘a priori’. Thus, the aim of this study was to elucidate the intrinsic functional connectivity in patients presenting with first episode psychosis (FEP). Resting state functional MRI data were available from 18 FEP patients, 9 of whom also experienced AVH of sufficient duration in the scanner and had symptom capture functional MRI (sc fMRI), together with 18 healthy controls. Symptom capture results were used to accurately identify specific brain regions active during AVH; including the superior temporal cortex, insula, precuneus, posterior cingulate and parahippocampal complex. Using these as seed regions, patients with FEP and AVH showed increased resting sb-FC between parts of the SN and the DMN and between the SN and the cerebellum, but reduced sb-FC between the claustrum and the insula, compared to healthy controls.It is possible that aberrant activity within the DMN and SN complex may be directly linked to impaired salience appraisal of internal activity and AVH generation. Furthermore, decreased intrinsic functional connectivity between the claustrum and the insula may lead to compensatory over activity in parts of the auditory network including areas involved in DMN, auditory processing, language and memory, potentially related to the complex and individual content of AVH when they occur.
Introduction.
Auditory verbal hallucinations (AVH) are commonly linked to schizophrenia and occur in over 75% of the patients with First Episode Psychosis (FEP). Current biological models of AVH can be grouped into those based on abnormal brain activation, source-monitoring deficits, or errors in prediction, . The abnormal activation theory proposes that AVH arise from spontaneous activation in the primary auditory, superior temporal cortex and related memory areas. According to source monitoring accounts, AVH results from failure to accurately monitor one’s own internal speech, which is then attributed to an external source. Prediction error models are based on the Bayesian framework that proposes positive symptoms of psychosis including hallucinations arise due to a mismatch between prior expectations and incoming sensory information, leading to a prediction error and voice perception. These models are not mutually exclusive and some commonality exists, for example prediction error can be implicated in source monitoring deficits. Study of brain activity during hallucination itself (symptom capture) allows direct evidence of regions active during hallucinations, and studies using this method show these regions include areas important for auditory perception (primary auditory cortex, and middle and superior temporal cortex), language (inferior frontal gyrus), and memory (hippocampus and parahippocampus). However, there remains a lack of detailed modelling that explains the spontaneous, complex and transient nature of AVH, and how the aberrant activity in these brain regions is triggered in the absence of an external stimuli. Thus the key question of how the brain generates AVH remains unanswered.
Recently, theories of abnormal integration have been proposed to explain symptoms of schizophrenia, including delusions and hallucinations, with a central abnormality being aberrant activity in intrinsic brain networks such as the default mode network (DMN) or the salience network (SN). Northoff proposed that AVH may result from abnormally elevated resting state activity in auditory cortex or from the default-mode network, with a ‘neural confusion’ between auditory resting state stimulus-induced activity, while Jardri et al. proposed that hallucinations occur during spontaneous DMN withdrawal. Disordered connectivity has also been implicated in schizophrenia, with mechanism of aberrant SN co-ordination of DMN and other brain regions . Thus, there is growing evidence of aberrant DMN and SN activity in schizophrenia, and a failure of integration or altered connectivity within brain networks that may explain positive symptoms including delusions and hallucinations. However, additional evidence is needed to elucidate the relationship of this activity to hallucinations in particular. Previous investigations of AVH, predominantly in patients with schizophrenia and long standing illness, assessing functional connectivity (FC) have used a seed-based approach (sb-FC) based on the three hypotheses outlined above, with seed placement in brain areas responsible for auditory processing, language, and memory; the striatum, and in areas of DMN. These have generated some conflicting results, possibly because of the varying seed placement and failure to control confounding factors such as length of illness and psychotropic medication.
The aim of the current study was to address these confounding factors by investigating the intrinsic FC in FEP patients with AVH. We further aimed to improve selection of seed regions by identifying brain areas activated during AVH itself in the same sample. Based on previous literature in participants with chronic AVH outlined above, we hypothesised that symptom capture in FEP patients would identify areas active in AVH including but not limited to primary auditory cortex, inferior frontal gyrus and the insula and that patients would show aberrant resting state FC between areas of the DMN and SN and these areas.
Materials and methods.
Participants.
Eighteen individuals diagnosed with FEP were recruited from the Early Intervention Service and Youth Service, Birmingham and Solihull Mental Health NHS Foundation Trust within 12 months of initial diagnosis and treatment onset. FEP was defined as the first presentation of DSM-IV schizophrenia, schizophreniform disorder, schizoaffective disorder or psychotic disorder not otherwise specified, confirmed using M.I.N.I. International Neuropsychiatric Interview (M.I.N.I. 6.0). All had at least one episode of AVH every other day.
Age, gender and handedness matched healthy controls (HC) (n = 18) were recruited from the local community via advertisements. HC had no personal history of mental illness or current mental health problems, and no first-degree relative with a history of psychotic disorder as defined by self-report.
Exclusion criteria for both groups included a history of any neurological disorder, seizures, or significant head injury, any contraindications for MRI and any significant risk history including suicide risk and violence (as assessed by the clinical team).
Ethical approval was obtained from the NHS HRA (reference 13/WM/0277) Ethics Committee. All participants provided written informed consent to participate in the study.
Procedure, MRI acquisition and preprocessing.
Information on demographic and clinical variables including age, gender, marital status, duration of treated and untreated psychosis, and current medication was recorded for patients. AVH were comprehensively assessed for both frequency and quality using the Beliefs about Voices Questionnaire—Revised (BAVQ-R), Topography of Voices Rating Scale (TVRS), Voice Power Differential Scale (VPD), and Auditory Hallucinations Subscale of Psychotic Symptoms Rating Scale (PSYRATS).
MRI acquisition.
Patients underwent neuroimaging including fMRI-symptom capture, resting state and structural MRI at the Birmingham University Imaging Centre using a 3 T Philips Achieva MRI scanner, whilst the HC completed the resting state and structural scan. Patients completed a 10-min fMRI symptom capture run wherein 200 volumes of BOLD-fMRI were acquired (TE = 30 ms, whole-brain coverage, TR = 3 s, voxel size 3 mm × 3 mm × 2 mm, field of view 192 × 192 × 100, flip angle 90°, matrix 64 × 64). Throughout this scan, participants had their right thumb resting on a button; and they were instructed to press and hold this for the duration of any AVHs experienced.
Participants completed a 10-min resting state scan when they were in the scanner in a state of wakeful rest with their eyes closed. Two hundred volumes of BOLD-fMRI were acquired (TE = 30 ms, whole-brain coverage, TR = 3 s, voxel size 3 mm × 3 mm × 2 mm, field of view 192 × 192 × 100, flip angle 90°, matrix 64 × 64). T1-weighted images (TR = 8.4 ms, TE = 3.8 ms, flip angle = 8°, FOV = 288 × 232 × 175 mm, voxel size 1mm3) were acquired for each participant for image registration. Participants wore headphones and earplugs throughout both scan runs to attenuate the noise of the scanner.
Preprocessing.
Anatomical and functional MRI scans were preprocessed with statistical parametric mapping software (SPM 8, Friston, The Welcome Department of Cognitive Neurology, London, UK; http://www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm) and the Data Processing Assistant for Resting-State fMRI Advanced Edition (DPARSFA) V3.1 (http://rfmri.org/DPARSF).
Preprocessing of symptom capture data: Preprocessing of the acquired images included slice time correction, realignment, co-registration with the anatomical image, spatial normalisation using a Montreal Neurological Institute template scan, and smoothing using 8-mm full-width-at-half-maximum 3D Gaussian kernel. If excessive movement was noted of realignment, defined as a translation of > 1 voxel (3 mm × 3 mm × 2 mm) or rotation of >2 degrees, artefact repair was performed to correct for it using the ArtRepair toolbox.
Preprocessing of resting state scans: The first ten volumes from each scan were excluded as dummy scans to allow stability of longitudinal magnetisation. The images were then reoriented and corrected for slice timing differences, with the middle slice being used as a reference slice. Both the T1 and the functional images were reoriented in order to improve co-registration accuracy. Brain extraction was then performed on the T1 images in order to remove the skull before co-registration to the functional images and to improve the co-registration algorithm. The T1 images were then coregistered to the functional images and segmented into grey matter, white matter (WM), and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) partitions. The Friston 24-parameter model was then used to obtain six head motion parameters, six head motion parameters one time-point before, and the 12 corresponding squared items and input them into our model as nuisance regressors. Any time-points that had a framewise displacement of more than 0.5 as well as one time-point before them and two time-points after them were regressed out. The WM and the CSF masks that were created during segmentation were then combined and their time series was calculated. Then, their first five principal components were calculated and entered as nuisance regressors in the model (CompCor). Diffeomorphic Anatomical Registration using Exponentiated Algebra (DARTEL) was used to create a group specific template to which all of the images were normalised to. An affine transformation of the images to the Montreal Neurological Institute (MNI) stereotactic space using the parameters estimated in DARTEL was performed. Finally, the images were smoothed with a Gaussian kernel of 8 mm full-width at half maximum.
Data analysis.
Statistical analyses of demographic and clinical data were performed using SPSS (SPSS version 24, Chicago, IL, USA). After testing for the normality of the distributions, continuous variables were compared using t-tests and categorical variables were compared using chi-square tests. Significance was set at p < 0.05.
Symptom capture analysis.
General linear model analysis was used on the pre-processed images. For each subject, one contrast vector (AVH minus rest) was specified to evaluate the effect of AVH (button pressed) relative to the baseline (button not pressed) with the six movement parameters (three translation and three rotation) from pre-processing entered as nuisance regressors. This produced a contrast image for each subject that was then entered into a second level, random-effects analysis, using a one-sample t-test. A group comparison of activation during AVH and at rest was then conducted. A cluster was considered as significant at p < 0.01 (uncorrected) and an extent criterion of k = 60 to reduce the likelihood of identifying false positive clusters. The uncorrected threshold was chosen to reduce the likelihood of type 2 error.
Seed-based FC analysis.
The brain regions that were identified in the symptom capture study were included as regions of interest (ROI) for the FC analyses. ROI were created using spherical peak coordinates with a radius of 4 mm. Four millimetre radius was chosen over 6 mm, more frequently used, in the aim of adding specificity to regions chosen. Pearson’s correlations coefficients between the time series of each seed region with voxels of the rest of the brain were then calculated for each ROI. A Fisher transformation was then used to convert these voxel-wise Pearson correlation coefficients into whole-brain z-values for each participant to conduct second-level analyses in SPM8.
The FC maps from individual participants were separately analysed using one-sample t-test for the entire sample with cluster level significance level set at p < 0.05 (family-wise error (FWE) corrected). The results from the one sample t-test were used to derive search volume masks for the FC to constrain subsequent between group analysis. The masks represented regions with significant instantaneous positive correlation or anticorrelation with the seed region. Between group analyses were conducted using an unpaired t-test with significance set at p < 0.05 (FWE corrected). All group level analyses were carried out using SPM8 software and the toolboxes MarsBar (http://marsbar.sourceforge.net) and xjview (http://www.alivelearn.net/xjview8).
In the patient group, bivariate correlations were used to examine the influence of current antipsychotic medications (chlorpromazine equivalent), and duration of illness on the mean coefficients within the clusters that emerged as significant from the two-sample t-tests. The scores on severity of hallucinations (TVRS, VPD, PSYRATS) were correlated with the mean coefficients within the clusters that were significantly different between patients and controls. The significance level was set at p < 0.05 (FWE corrected across all comparisons).