Title.
Magnetoencephalographic and functional MRI connectomics in schizophrenia via intra- and inter-network connectivity.
Abstract.
Examination of intrinsic functional connectivity using functional MRI (fMRI) has provided important findings regarding dysconnectivity in schizophrenia. Extending these results using a complementary neuroimaging modality, magnetoencephalography (MEG), we present the first direct comparison of functional connectivity between schizophrenia patients and controls, using these two modalities combined. We developed a novel MEG approach for estimation of networks using MEG that incorporates spatial independent component analysis (ICA) and pairwise correlations between independent component timecourses, to estimate intra- and intern-network connectivity. This analysis enables group-level inference and testing of between-group differences. Resting state MEG and fMRI data were acquired from a large sample of healthy controls (n=45) and schizophrenia patients (n=46). Group spatial ICA was performed on fMRI and MEG data to extract intrinsic fMRI and MEG networks and to compensate for signal leakage in MEG. Similar, but not identical spatial independent components were detected for MEG and fMRI. Analysis of functional network connectivity (FNC; i.e., pairwise correlations in network (ICA component) timecourses) revealed a differential between-modalities pattern, with greater connectivity among occipital networks in fMRI and among frontal networks in MEG. Most importantly, significant differences between controls and patients were observed in both modalities. MEG FNC results in particular indicated dysfunctional hyperconnectivity within frontal and temporal networks in patients, while in fMRI FNC was always greater for controls than for patients. This is the first study to apply group spatial ICA as an approach to leakage correction, and as such our results may be biased by spatial leakage effects. Results suggest that combining these two neuroimaging modalities reveals additional disease-relevant patterns of connectivity that were not detectable with fMRI or MEG alone.
1. Introduction.
More than 2000 neuroimaging papers examining the human “resting state” have been published since the first fMRI study. Analysis of resting state data has yielded information across a wide range of topics including basic sensory processing, tobacco and alcohol use, neurodegenerative diseases, and neuropsychiatric illnesses. Resting state protocols are particularly advantageous for the study of disease states where patients may have difficulty responding or performing behavioral tasks due to compromised cognitive and/or physiological functions. Connectivity methods such as independent component analysis (ICA) are a set of powerful analysis techniques used to analyze resting brain activity. Such approaches are particularly relevant to disease states such as schizophrenia, in which dysfunctional connectivity (“dysconnectivity”) is hypothesized to underlie patient symptoms. Because this dysconnectivity is thought to be driven by aberrant synaptic plasticity, characterizing functional connectivity may be essential to understanding the disorder.
Group independent component analysis (gICA) is an effective means of interrogating functional dysconnectivity in schizophrenia. As typically applied to resting fMRI data, this technique identifies and reconstructs temporally-coherent, spatially-independent networks in groups of subjects, where “networks” are defined as components identified via ICA. Spatial independence facilitates the comparison of topographies, or maps, between groups, while the property of temporal coherence permits the assessment of interregional, connectivity between spatially independent networks. However, exclusive reliance on fMRI to generate such networks may limit inference on dysconnectivity: Whilst the blood oxygenation-level dependent (BOLD) response measured by fMRI allows high spatial resolution maps, it is limited by being an indirect and slow physiological signal. Neural oscillatory activity, which comprises rhythmic electrical activity in cell assemblies, is thought to underlie BOLD responses. This occurs in the ~1–900Hz band; such rapid electrical signals cannot be assessed using fMRI but can be measured directly by techniques such as magnetoencephalography (MEG), a noninvasive neuroimaging technique used to infer the cortical current distribution via assessment of the induced extra-cranial magnetic fields. Measurement of resting state brain activity using both fMRI and MEG, within a common sample of subjects, combines the strengths of each modality by allowing comparison of haemodynamic and electrophysiological effects. In this way we provide significant insight into functional connectivity, with special relevance for the study of schizophrenia and similar conditions. Significant progress towards integrating MEG and fMRI has been made in the past decade. MEG inverse solutions such now permit functional connectivity analysis in the same brain space as fMRI. This approach has already been used to evaluate intrinsic connectivity networks (ICNs) in MEG in a similar way to that typically used in fMRI. Neural oscillations are implicated strongly in this approach and in particular, multiple studies have now shown that assessment of temporal correlation between the amplitude envelopes of oscillatory activity facilitates elucidation of distributed network structure that bears reasonable resemblance to fMRI.
The purpose of the present study is to use both fMRI and band limited envelope correlation metrics in MEG to interrogate functional connectivity in the resting state in a sample of healthy normal volunteers and schizophrenia patients. Using methods based on group spatial ICA, for the first time we estimate networks from both MEG and fMRI and compare and contrast the networks and findings from the two modalities, with the hypotheses that 1) Patients and controls would differ significantly on both MEG and fMRI measures of intra-network connectivity, called functional network connectivity (FNC), and 2) MEG and fMRI spatial maps would show substantial overlap.
2. Materials and Methods.
2.1 Participants.
This investigation combined existing data from 91 participants, 46 schizophrenia patients and 45 healthy controls. Informed consent was obtained from all participants according to institutional guidelines at the University of New Mexico Human Research Protections Office (HRPO). All participants were compensated for their participation. Patients with a diagnosis of schizophrenia or schizoaffective disorder were invited to participate. Each patient completed the Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV Axis I Disorders for diagnostic confirmation and evaluation of co-morbidities. Patients with a history of neurological disorders including head trauma (loss of consciousness > 5 minutes), mental retardation, history of substance dependence, or active substance abuse (except for nicotine) within the past year were excluded, as were patients who were clinically unstable (e.g., in the previous month were discharged from the hospital or had any changes in their psychotropic medications). Stability was also monitored throughout the study to confirm that patients had no clinically meaningful symptom changes. All patients had a negative urine toxicology for drugs of abuse at the time of enrollment in the study. Patients were treated with a variety of antipsychotic medications. The doses of antipsychotic medications were converted to olanzapine equivalents (see Table 1:). Healthy controls were recruited from the same geographic location and completed the SCID – Non-Patient Edition to rule out Axis I conditions. Although patients and controls were not yoked, demographic characteristics including age, gender, and caregiver socio-economic status were monitored throughout recruitment to ensure that both groups were of similar composition. There were no significant between-group differences on these measures (see Table 1), and results were largely unchanged when demographic characteristics were included as covariates. All participant smokers were instructed not to use tobacco during the two hours prior to each scan to minimize acute effects. This was confirmed via a breath carbon monoxide measure of less than 8 ppm. Each participant completed resting MEG and MRI scans. Scans were collected in counterbalanced order, with a median time between scans of approximately 22 days.
2.2 fMRI Data Acquisition.
All fMRI data were collected on a 3-Tesla Siemens Trio scanner with a 12-channel radio frequency coil. High-resolution T1-weighted structural images were acquired with a five-echo MPRAGE sequence with TE = 1.64, 3.5, 5.36, 7.22, 9.08 ms, TR = 2.53 s, TI = 1.2 s, flip angle = 7°, number of excitations = 1, slice thickness = 1 mm, field of view = 256 mm, resolution = 256×256. T2*-weighted functional images were acquired using a gradient-echo EPI sequence with TE = 29 ms, TR = 2 s, flip angle = 75°, slice thickness = 3.5 mm, slice gap = 1.05 mm, field of view 240 mm, matrix size = 64x64, voxel size = 3.75 mm×3.75 mm×4.55 mm. Resting-state scans consisted of 149 volumes per run.
2.3 fMRI Data Preprocessing.
An automated preprocessing pipeline and neuroinformatics system developed at MRN was used to preprocess the fMRI data. The first four volumes were discarded to remove T1 equilibration effects. Images were realigned and slice-timing correction was applied using the middle slice as the reference frame in the functional data pipeline. The data were then spatially normalized to the standard MNI space, resampled to 3×3× 3 mm voxels, and smoothed using a Gaussian kernel with a full-width at half-maximum (FWHM) of 10 mm. The preprocessed time series data were scaled to a mean of 100.
2.4 fMRI Group Spatial Independent Component Analysis (gsICA).
Following Allen et al., we performed a subject-specific data reduction PCA retaining 100 principal components (PC). In order to use memory more efficiently, group data reduction was performed using an EM-based PCA algorithm and C = 75 PCs were retained. The infomax algorithm (cf.) was used for gICA. It was performed using the GIFT Toolbox (http://mialab.mrn.org/software/gift/). This high model order ICA (number of components, C = 75) affords a number of advantages, including the ability to use the resulting FNC matrix to infer how components would group in the case of a lower-dimension estimation, as well as refined components that correspond to known anatomical and functional segmentation. In order to estimate the reliability of the decomposition, the Infomax ICA algorithm was applied repeatedly via ICASSO and resulting components were clustered. Subject-specific maps and timecourses were estimated using a back-reconstruction approach based on PCA compression and projection.
2.5 fMRI Feature Identification.
To identify non-artifactual components that contain features associated with resting state networks a combination of two methods was used. In the first method we examined the power spectra with two criteria in mind: dynamic range and low frequency/high frequency ratio. Dynamic range refers to the difference between the peak power and minimum power at frequencies to the right of the peak in the power spectra. Low frequency to high frequency power ratio is the ratio of the integral of spectral power below 0.10 Hz to the integral of power between 0.15 and 0.25 Hz. To verify the results, three expert reviewers evaluated the components for functional relevance. In this evaluation, if a component exhibited 1) peak activation in gray matter, 2) low spatial overlap with known vascular, ventricular, motion, and susceptibility artifacts, and 3) TCs dominated by low frequency fluctuations, it was classified as a non-artifactual component. Of the 75 components returned by the gICA, 39 were identified as BOLD-related component; see Fig. S1.
2.6 MEG data acquisition.
MEG data were collected in a magnetically and electrically shielded room (VAC Series Ak3B, Vacuumschmelze GmbH) using a whole-cortex 306-channel MEG array (Elekta Neuromag™) at the Mind Research Network. Before positioning the participant in the MEG, four coils were affixed to the participant’s head: two on the forehead and one behind each ear. These coils allow determination of the position of the participant’s head relative to the position and orientation of the MEG sensors. Additional positioning data were collected using a 3D digitizer (Polhemus Fastrak) in order to permit co-localization of MEG activity with the anatomical MRI result for each participant. Two channels of electro-oculogram (EOG), one vertical and one horizontal, and one channel of electrocardiogram (ECG) were collected simultaneously with MEG. MEG data were sampled at a rate of 1000 Hz, with a bandpass filter of 0.10 to 330 Hz. Head position was monitored continuously throughout the MEG session. Raw data were collected and stored. Participants were instructed to keep their eyes open and maintain fixation during the 6-minute scan to minimize occipital alpha rhythm.
2.7 MEG data preprocessing.
Artifact removal, correction for head movement, and downsampling to 250 Hz were conducted offline using Elekta Maxfilter software, with 123 basis vectors, a spatiotemporal buffer of 10 s, and a correlation limit of r=.95. Cardiac and blink artefacts were removed using a signal-space projection (SSP) approach. To facilitate an exploratory comparison with previous research, data were bandpass filtered into four frequency ranges of interest: delta (1–4 Hz), theta (5–9 Hz), alpha (10–15 Hz), and beta (16–29 Hz).
2.8 MEG beamformer projection.
Covariance matrices were generated independently for each subject and frequency band, using all recorded data. Covariance matrices were regularized using a value of 4 times the minimum singular value of the unregularized matrix. That is, after estimation of the covariance matrix we regularized the matrix by adding a constant to the diagonal. The constant added was four times the minimum singular value of the unregularized covariance matrix. Voxels were placed on a regular 6-mm3 grid spanning the brain image. Source orientation at each voxel was based on a nonlinear search for maximum projected signal-to-noise ratio. The forward solution was based on a dipole model and a single-shell boundary element model. Beamformer projection was performed separately for each subject and frequency range. After beamformer projection, source-space signals were normalized by an estimate of projected noise and transformed to standard (MNI) space using FLIRT in FSL. A Hilbert transform was applied to the time course at each voxel time to derive the analytic signal. The absolute value of this analytic signal was computed to yield the Hilbert envelope, an amplitude envelope of oscillatory power. The Hilbert envelope at each voxel was downsampled to an effective sampling rate of 1 Hz. Source space envelope data were smoothed spatially (6 mm3 at full-width half-maximum), and the voxel size was resampled to 3×3×3 mm to facilitate comparison with the fMRI data. While strong and sustained correlations between brain regions can lead to beamformer failure, this requires correlations that persist through 30–40% of the period analyzed, unlikely in resting data.
2.9 MEG Group Spatial Independent Component Analysis (gsICA).
Group spatial ICA was applied to the individual subject data using the GIFT toolbox. The gsICA approach was selected over group temporal ICA (gtICA) for two reasons: 1) Because components produced by gsICA are not temporally independent, relations among network timecourses can be evaluated; and 2) gtICA of participant timecourses carries the assumption of temporal consistency, limiting its utility in group analysis of resting data. Replicating and extending the work of, each frequency range was treated as a session in GIFT to permit exploratory analysis of each band, as well as the mean across bands. MEG ICA processing generally followed the procedures applied to the fMRI. Reduction steps were applied using principal component analysis. First, subject-specific data reduction was applied, retaining 100 principal components. Next, group level data reduction was applied to reduce the dataset to 75 principal components. Infomax ICA was applied 20 times in ICASSO and the resulting components were clustered. Spatial maps were generated by decomposing the mixed MEG timecourses to yield a set of spatially independent and temporally coherent networks. As with fMRI, subject-specific maps and timecourses were estimated using a back-reconstruction approach based on PCA compression and projection. This approach was chosen over alternate reconstruction approaches (e.g., GICA1, GICA2, dual regression) because it provides more accurate estimates for each subject and is more readily interpretable.
2.10 MEG feature identification.
Consistent with standard practice, component quality was assessed both qualitatively, to remove components situated in white matter and ventricles, and quantitatively, using assessments of dynamic range and the ratio of low-frequency to high-frequency power in each component. Components were separated into artifactual and non-artifactual components. Of the 75 components requested from the group ICA, 29 were retained as non-artifactual components; see Fig. S2. In the present context these criteria, originally applied previously to fMRI ICA components, also appeared to perform well for MEG. As with fMRI, MEG FNC was defined as the zero-lag cross-correlations among reconstructed timecourses.