Title.
Dorsal anterior cingulate glutamate is associated with engagement of the default mode network during exposure to smoking cues.
Abstract.
Background.
When exposed to smoking cues, nicotine dependent individuals activate brain regions overlapping with the default mode network (DMN), a network of regions involved in internally-focused cognition. The salience network (SN), which includes the dorsal anterior cingulate cortex (dACC), is thought to interact with the DMN and aids in directing attention toward salient internal or external stimuli. One possibility is that neurochemical variation in SN regions such as the dACC impact DMN reactivity to personally relevant stimuli such as smoking cues. This is consistent with emerging evidence suggesting an association between midline cortical glutamate (Glu) and activity in brain regions overlapping with the DMN.
Methods.
In 18 nicotine-dependent individuals, we assessed the relationship between DMN activation to smoking relative to neutral cues using functional magnetic resonance imaging and dACC Glu as measured by magnetic resonance spectroscopy. This association also was tested in a replication sample of 14 nicotine-dependent participants.
Results.
Not only was the DMN significantly less suppressed during smoking cue exposure, but also there was a positive association between DMN reactivity to smoking relative to neutral cues and dACC Glu (r = 0.56, p < 0.02). This finding was confirmed in the independent replication cohort (r = 0.64, p < 0.02).
Conclusions.
The current findings confirm that the DMN is less suppressed when smokers view smoking relative to neutral cues, suggesting that smoking cues engage self-relevant processing. Furthermore, these results indicate that dACC Glu is associated with enhanced DMN engagement when nicotine-dependent individuals are exposed to self-relevant smoking cues.
1. INTRODUCTION.
Smoking cues are highly relevant for nicotine dependent individuals. For tobacco smokers, these cues have been associated with the rewarding effects of nicotine, signal the potential end of withdrawal symptoms, and have the ability to motivate continued drug use. Thus, it is unsurprising that cortical brain regions involved in self-relevant processing show enhanced activity when smokers view such cues. A meta-analysis showed that brain regions typically reactive to smoking cues include the medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC) extending into the rostral anterior cingulate cortex (rACC) and the precuneus (PrC) extending into the posterior cingulate cortex (PCC). It has been pointed out that this pattern of activation overlaps with the default mode network (DMN), which is a commonly studied network of brain regions involved in self-referential processing.
While DMN activity is associated with cognitive processes involving an internal focus such as self-reference, when recalling one’s past, and planning one’s personal future, the DMN is typically less active during cognitive tasks that require an external focus. Some evidence suggests that cortical midline glutamate (Glu) may play a role in regulating DMN suppression during externally focused cognition. Specifically, a high level of Glu in the PCC/precuneus is associated with reduced task-related DMN suppression. Further, dorsal anterior cingulate (dACC) Glu may modulate task-related activity in regions of the DMN during cognitive control. This concept is consistent with nicotine dependence research as the smoking cessation therapy varenicline not only facilitated DMN suppression during externally focused cognition, but also reduced dACC Glu. The relationship between dACC Glu and DMN activity is particularly relevant considering the fact that the dACC is a primary hub of the salience network (SN), which is thought to guide task-specific suppression or engagement of the DMN by identifying the most relevant internal or extrapersonal stimuli. For instance, SN brain regions, which include the dACC and insula, co-activate with the DMN during tasks requiring an internal focus such as autobiographical planning, and these regions are strongly implicated in smoking cue-reactivity, craving, and dependence severity.
It is still unclear whether DMN reactivity to smoking cues is related to the level of dACC Glu. Such a finding would support the role of dACC Glu in the self-referential processing of smoking cues, which may influence the impact these cues have on behavior. We hypothesized a positive association between dACC Glu and DMN activity during smoking cue-reactivity due to the self-relevant nature of these stimuli. This conjecture is supported by the prior work linking heightened cortical midline Glu and disrupted suppression of DMN regions during tasks requiring external focus.
Additionally, structural integrity of the salience network impacts DMN function (Bonnelle et al., 2012), which begs the question of whether neurochemical variation in the salience network also impacts DMN function. To address this question we measured dACC Glu using magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS) and brain reactivity to smoking cues using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) in two previously published independent samples of nicotine dependent individuals.
2. MATERIALS AND METHODS.
2.1 Participants.
Data were evaluated in two independent samples of individuals who participated in all study elements at McLean Hospital’s Imaging Center. The primary analysis was conducted using data from our prior work where nicotine dependent individuals were exposed to smoking vs. neutral cues, while our replication cohort was exposed to smoking vs. neutral cues within the context of a working memory task. Our primary cohort was comprised of 18 nicotine-dependent individuals aged 31.4 ± 1.4 years (10 women / 8 men), while our replication cohort was comprised of 14 nicotine-dependent individuals aged 26 ± 1.22 years (8 women / 6 men). Both cohorts were moderately nicotine dependent as indicated by the Fagerstrom test of nicotine dependence and reported smoking ≥10 cig/day over the last 6 months. Smoking status was confirmed by expired carbon monoxide immediately upon entering the study (CO: Micro Smokerlyzer II, Bedfont Scientific Instruments, Kent UK). For full demographics see table 1.
The structured clinical interview for DSM IV-TR was used to exclude participants with the following conditions: organic mental disorder, bipolar disorder, and schizophrenia spectrum disorder. Participants also were excluded for a substance use disorder other than nicotine dependence, current depressive episode, psychotropic drug use, pregnancy, and were required to have a zero blood alcohol level as measured by a breath sample (Alco-Sensor IV, Intoximeters, St Louis, MO). All participants gave verbal and written consent prior to participating in any study procedures and this research was approved by the Partners Human Research Committee, which is the institutional review board of Partners Healthcare hospitals.
2.2 Functional Neuroimaging.
To standardize the time since a cigarette was last smoked relative to all study procedures, all participants in both cohorts smoked one of their own cigarettes after signing the informed consent approximately 1.5 hours prior to MR scanning. Expired carbon monoxide was measured immediately before and after scanning. Subjective craving to smoking and neutral images also was assessed after scanning by asking participants to rate how much craving they experienced when viewing each image on a five-point scale.
Acquisition parameters were identical between cohorts. Imaging was completed on a Siemens Trio 3T (2.89T) scanner (Erlangen, Germany) using a 32-channel head coil. Multiecho multi-planar rapidly acquired gradient echostructural images were acquired with the following parameters (TR = 2.1 s, TE = 3.3 ms, slices = 128, matrix = 256 × 256, flip angle 7 degrees, resolution = 1.0 × 1.0 × 1.33 mm). Task-related fMRI was collected using a gradient echo echoplanar sequence with the following parameters (TR = 2 s, TE = 30 ms, flip angle = 75 degrees, slices = 37, distance factor 10%, voxel size = 3.5 mm isotropic and a GRAPPA acceleration factor of 2).
2.3 Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy.
Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy also was identical between cohorts and was collected following procedures outlined in our prior work. Proton spectra were acquired using a modified J-resolved PRESS protocol (two-dimensional (2D)-JPRESS). A single 2 × 2 × 3 cm voxel was placed in the dACC using the high-resolution T1-weighted anatomical images. Shimming of the magnetic field within the prescribed voxel was done automatically using an automated shimming routine. Automated optimization also included water suppression power, carrier frequency, tip angles, and coil tuning. The 2D-JPRESS sequence collected 22 echo time (TE)-stepped spectra with the TE ranging from 30 to 350 ms in 15 ms increments. Acquisition parameters were: TR: 2 s, acquisition bandwidth = 67 Hz, spectral bandwith = 2 kHz, readout duration = 512 ms, NEX = 16/TE-step.
2.4 MRS Processing and Analysis.
To quantify Glu with the JPRESS data, the 22 TE-stepped free-induction decay was zero-filled out to 64 points, Gaussian-filtered and Fourier transformed. Using our previously published methods, every J-resolved spectral extraction (64 in total) within the 67 Hz bandwith was fitted with LCModel and its theoretically-correct template, which is optimized GAMMA-simulated J-resolved basis sets modeled for 2.89 T. All spectral data were modeled for 2.89 T field strength (123.05 MHz) to match that of our TRIO scanner. The integrated area under the 2D surface for each metabolite was calculated by summing the raw peak areas across all 64 J-resolved extractions. Glutamate metabolites were expressed as ratios of total creatine (Cr).
2.5 Image Segmentation/voxel Tissue Analysis.
As in our prior work, all image segmentation was performed using FSL. The FSL segmentation tool was used to automatically segment cortical gray matter (GM), white matter (WM), and cerebral spinal fluid (CSF). These segmented images were evaluated using an automated voxel coregistration and partial-volume analysis in-house program written in C-code. Subsequently, the volumetric tissue contribution for each oblique dACC voxel was determined and volumetric contributions of total GM, WM, and CSF calculated.
2.6 fMRI and Smoking Cues.
Evaluating brain reactivity to smoking > neutral cues was done in the context of one of two studies involving either the traditional cue reactivity task or working memory for smoking cues. These tasks are explained in detail in our prior work. In both tasks, the same smoking and neutral cues were used. Smoking images included smoking-related content such as people smoking, people holding cigarettes, or cigarettes alone. Neutral images were matched for content in that they involved people, hands, or objects such as pens or paintbrushes. In the traditional cue-reactivity task, presented to our primary cohort, target images were also presented to ensure participants were awake and attending to the task. Targets were pictures of animals and participants were asked to press a button when a target appeared. This data only was used to ensure participants were attending to the task. Our primary cohort was shown 60 smoking, 60 neutral and 12 target images divided evenly across 5 blocks lasting 5 m and 18 s each. Images were presented for 4 s in a pseudorandom order with no more than 2 of the same picture type occurring in a row as performed in our prior work. Images were divided by a jittered inter-trial-interval ranging from 6 – 14s in intervals of 2 s with a 10 s average across block. During this inter-trial interval, participants in the primary cohort were shown a white fixation cross on a black screen. The replication cohort was exposed to smoking cues in the context of the delay-match-to-sample working memory task. For the purposes of the present study only the “sample” portion of this task was analyzed, as this corresponds most closely to the traditional cue-reactivity task. During the sample period, participants were shown either a smoking or neutral image for 2 s that they would have to match to a subsequent image following a 10 s delay. Thus, the sample period allows for the smoking > neutral contrast to be conducted without involving the working memory component involved in the other task elements and closely resembles the traditional cue reactivity task. To insure participants were attending, only trials where participants performed accurately were included in the analysis. The majority of trials were included, as accuracy ranged from 0.92 ± 0.01 – 0.97 ± 0.07 depending on trial type.
2.7 fMRI Pre-Processing.
Tools from the fMRI of the brain (FMRIB) software Library (FSL; http://www.fmrib.ox.ac.uk/fsl) were used to process all fMRI data. For all analyses, the first 5 volumes were removed to allow for signal stabilization. Functional data were then pre-processed including motion correction, brain extraction, slice timing correction, spatial smoothing with a Gaussian kernel for a full-width half-maximum 6 mm, and a high-pass temporal filter with Gaussian-weighted least-squares straight-line fitting with 100 s. Each individual participant’s data was registered to the MNI152 2 mm3 standard space template (Montreal Neurological Institute, Montreal, QC, Canada). For task-related data, an in-house program used in our prior work was used to detect and adjust for artifacts generated by intensity spiking.
2.8 Cue-Reactivity.
For both the traditional cue-reactivity and working memory tasks, the first-level analysis was conducted on each of the participant’s individual task runs separately and all task-related regressors were convolved with the gamma hemodynamic response function. Confound regressors representing motion were also included in the model. Contrasts were conducted between the smoking and neutral image conditions. For the working memory task these contrasts were conducted during the sample period of the delay-match-to-sample task. In both instances, these lower level individual runs were combined in the second level to generate the average brain reactivity for each individual participant. For the primary cohort we conducted a group level mixed effects (FLAME) whole brain analysis for the smoking vs. neutral contrast. Multiple comparisons were corrected to p < 0.05 using a cluster-based threshold across the entire brain Z – 2.3. This whole brain activation to the smoking vs. neutral contrast was compared to the DMN region of interest (ROI) defined by, Fig.1) by calculating the cross correlation between these maps using the FSL command fslcc. To more directly evaluate how the DMN responds to smoking > neutral cues, beta-weights from the DMN ROI were extracted using FSL’s featquery from each individual. The Pearson’s correlation coefficient was then calculated between DMN beta-weights and dACC Glu/Cr for each cohort to assess the association between these measures.