Title.
CYP2A6 genetic variation alters striatal-cingulate circuits, network hubs and executive processing in smokers.
Abstract.
Background.
Variation in the CYP2A6 gene alters the rate of nicotine metabolic inactivation and is associated with smoking behaviors and cessation success rates. The underlying neurobiological mechanisms of this genetic influence remain unknown.
Methods.
Intrinsic functional connectivity strength (FCS), a whole brain, data driven, graph theory based method, was applied to resting state fMRI data in 66 smokers and 92 nonsmokers. A subset of subjects (n=23/20; smokers/nonsmokers) performed the Monetary Incentive Delay (MID) task, probing reward anticipation and a Go/NoGo task, probing response inhibition, on two occasions, in the presence and absence of a nicotine patch.
Results.
A significant CYP2A6 genotype × Smoking effect was found in the dorsal anterior cingulate cortex (dACC) and ventral striatum (VS), such that the normal (vs. slow) genotype individuals showed greater FCS in smokers but not nonsmokers. FCS was negatively associated with nicotine dependence severity in slow metabolizers. Both hubs were biased by inputs from the insula identified from seed-based connectivity. Similar Gene × Environment interactions were seen in VS during smoking abstinence when subjects performed the MID task and in dACC when they performed the Go/NoGo task; both reductions were “normalized” in smokers (and increased in nonsmokers) following acute nicotine administration.
Conclusions.
Since the CYP2A6 effect was seen only in smokers, these data suggest that the rate of nicotine metabolism, and thus the concentration of nicotine presented to brain over the course of nicotine addiction, shapes brain circuits that, among other functions, compute reward and impulsivity processes.
Introduction.
Nicotine is the principal addictive component in tobacco that maintains smoking behavior. Nicotine (and other drug) dependence induces neuroplastic alterations in brain circuits, which in turn contribute to the altered behavioral and cognitive processes seen in dependent individuals that impact their ability to stop smoking. However, identifying the neuroanatomical loci and then mechanistically linking these dependence-induced neuroadaptations and genetic influences with their behavioral consequences remains very poorly understood. With the consistently poor outcomes following treatment for nicotine dependence, empirically based neurobiological mechanisms have the potential to improve treatment efficacy via individualized treatment optimization along with the discovery of novel drug targets.
The hepatic enzyme cytochrome P450 (CYP2A6) is the main metabolic pathway responsible for nicotine inactivation and clearance; CYP2A6 is expressed at very low levels in the human brain, or not at all. Variation in the CYP2A6 gene alters the rate of nicotine metabolism, with the slow genotype reducing nicotine metabolism more than 50%. Smokers with the reduced (slow and intermediate) CYP2A6 genotype start smoking earlier in life, become dependent quicker, but smoke fewer cigarettes and have a higher likelihood of quitting smoking. Slow metabolizers have higher quit success rates when using either placebo or transdermal nicotine replacement therapy (NRT, i.e. nicotine patch) vs. varenicline (Chantix®) usage, but have greater adverse effects from varenicline, while normal genotype individuals respond better to varenicline than to NRT. Thus these CYP2A6 genetic effects on cessation persist months after being nicotine free, suggesting that genetic variations in this metabolic pathway likely created long-lasting brain changes that result in these differential smoking phenotypes and treatment response differences.
The underlying neurobiological mechanisms of the impact of this genetically variable pharmacokinetic (PK) enzyme on smoking-related behaviors and neuroplasticity are largely unknown. Only a single study has been published, which reported that slow metabolizing smokers have reduced limbic responses to smoking cues. However, both human and preclinical data indicate the importance of PK influences on drug addiction – both the rate of drug onset (primarily influenced by route of delivery) and offset (primarily influenced by biotransformation and distribution). Smoking (relative to nicotine patch) delivers nicotine to the brain in seconds, while genetically variable rates of nicotine inactivation by CYP2A6 leads to variable offset time, both of which may result in rapid and long lasting neuroplastic effects and differential abuse potential. Indeed, the rapid onset of action for both nicotine and cocaine preferentially engage mesocorticolimbic (MCL) circuits to promote neurobehavioral plasticity. In contrast, variation in the ‘off-time’ can alter the abuse and dependence of drugs from a number of classes, including cocaine, benzodiazepines and nicotine. For example, while both cocaine and methylphenidate have high affinity for the dopamine transporter and reach the brain rapidly after intravenous administration, cocaine’s shorter duration of action, due to rapid removal from brain, both promotes and enables its frequent use, while methylphenidate has a much longer duration of action due to its slower brain clearance and has a much lower abuse profile.
Since smokers with the slow metabolism CYP2A6 genotype have relatively constant nicotine plasma levels throughout the day, while those with faster metabolism likely experience a greater surge in plasma nicotine with each cigarette, and as changes in PK can change fundamental neurobiological mechanisms, we reasoned that CYP2A6-induced modifications in brain nicotine concentration differentially alters nicotinic receptor function and in turn, modifies brain circuits that contribute to the development and/or maintenance of nicotine addiction and its plasticity-related behavioral and cognitive profile. We also reasoned that this would occur only among smokers, while those not exposed to nicotine would have no genotype-induced neuroplastic differences, leading to significant and meaningful Gene × Environment (CYP2A6-smoking) interactions.
However, as smokers present with a spectrum of altered behaviors and neuronal circuits, we could not a priori predict those circuits that might be most sensitive to variable nicotine exposure. We thus interrogated the effects of CYP2A6 genotype on whole brain network topological organization using resting state functional connectivity (rsFC) and a data driven analytical graph theory metric, functional connectivity strength (FCS). High FCS of a region is thought to reflect high nodal activity, thought to reflect regions of high neuronal integration.
To complement this data driven network approach, we also considered smoking status (smoker vs. nonsmoker), current level of smoking (cigarettes per day, CPD) and nicotine dependence severity (Fagerstrom Test for Nicotine Dependence, FTND). We hypothesized that the CYP2A6 genotype would, among smokers but not among nonsmokers, 1) influence brain FCS; 2) alter FCS within nodes of the MCL dopamine system; and 3) modulate neuronal computations and cognitive processes, specifically reward processing and inhibitory control.
To test these hypotheses, we genotyped smokers and nonsmokers for the CYP2A6 polymorphism and subsequently classified them as normal, intermediate or slow nicotine metabolizers. In addition to acquiring resting state BOLD data, a subset of smokers and nonsmokers also performed the MID reward task and a Go/NoGo response inhibition task on two sessions-once while wearing a nicotine patch and once after 12 hours of smoking abstinence.
Methods and Materials.
Participants.
Resting state BOLD fMRI data were acquired from non-treatment seeking smokers (n=66) and nonsmokers (n=92), matched by age, sex, IQ and race (Table 1). Subjects were selected from a large cohort of individuals who gave written informed consent under protocols approved by the NIDA-IRP IRB. IRB approval for CYP2A6 genotyping was granted at the University of Toronto. A subset of smokers (n=23; 15 normal and 8 reduced metabolizers) and nonsmokers (n=20; 9 normal and 11 reduced) also performed two fMRI tasks following resting BOLD data acquisition: the Monetary Incentive Delay (MID) task, which assesses neuronal activity during anticipation of and outcome for monetary rewards, and a Go/NoGo task assessing response inhibition. See SI for details of fMRI data acquisition and preprocessing and voxel-based morphometry (VBM) data analyses and results.
Genotyping.
Genomic DNA was extracted from blood samples and genotyped for CYP2A6 as described. Based on the impact of enzymatic activity, subjects were grouped into normal, intermediate and slow metabolizers. Due to the more limited cohort size available for task data, we combined the slow and intermediate genotype groups into a single reduced genotype group for task analysis.
FCS analysis.
FCS, defined as the sum of functional connectivity between any one voxel and all other brain voxels, was computed for each subject from 6 min of BOLD fMRI acquired with subjects’ eyes open. Functional connectivity between voxels was measured using Pearson correlation in MATLAB (The MathWorks Inc, Natick, Massachusetts). FCS was computed after thresholding the correlation map at r > 0.25. A voxel-wise threshold of P < 0.01 and a spatial-extent of 30 contiguous voxels were determined via Monte Carlo simulation to provide a corrected threshold of P < 0.05.
MID and Go/NoGo tasks.
Subjects performed two tasks on two occasions, separated by 1–7 days. A nicotine or placebo patch was placed, in random order, 2–9 hours prior to scanning. Trials in the MID task included four sequential stimuli: PRIME-1 (gain, loss or neutral), PRIME-2 (win/loss magnitude), TARGET, and FEEDBACK; a button press was required to the TARGET. For the Go/NoGo task, subjects viewed a serial stream of alternating ‘X’ and ‘Y’ letters and were to respond to each target while the stimulus was present on the screen. NoGo stimuli, in which the target stimuli did not alternate (e.g. X, X), required response inhibition.
Since we had strong a priori interest in the ventral striatum (VS) for the MID task and dorsal anterior cingulate cortex (dACC) for the Go/NoGo task, we did region of interest analysis and small volume correction (Pcorrected < 0.05) using respectively, a striatal atlas (http://fsl.fmrib.ox.ac.uk/fsl) and dACC mask.
Statistical analysis.
A 3 (Genotype) × 2 (Smokers, Nonsmokers) ANCOVA was performed on whole brain FCS maps, using age, gender, IQ, race and years of education as covariates. Post-hoc one-way ANOVA and two-tailed independent t-tests identified differences between groups. MID and Go/NoGo tasks were analyzed using GLM. Associations between FCS in regions showing significant GENOTYPE × SMOKING interactions and FTND/CPD were tested using Pearson’s correlation analyses. The mean FCS in these regions was regressed against age, IQ and years of education. One and two way ANOVAs followed by Tukey’s t-test for multiple comparisons and frequency analyses (Pearson’s χ2-test) were conducted (SPSS 20, IBM, Armonk, New York) to compare demographic and behavioral characteristics among groups.