Title.
Regional Homogeneity Changes in Nicotine Addicts by Resting-State fMRI.
Abstract.
Objective.
To reveal the brain functional changes of nicotine addicts compared with those of non-smokers and explore the objective biomarker for nicotine dependence evaluation.
Methods.
A total of 14 smokers and 11 non-smoking controls were recruited for this study. Resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging and regional homogeneity (ReHo) were applied in the neural activity analysis. Two-sample t-test was performed to examine the voxel-wise difference between the smokers and the controls. Correlation analysis between the ReHo values and the Fagerstrom Test for Nicotine Dependence (FTND) scores were performed to explore the biomarkers for the clinical characteristics of smokers.
Results.
The ReHo values from the right superior frontal gyrus of the Brodmann’s area (BA) 9 to the right middle frontal gyrus and the ReHo value from the left and right precuneus (BA 23) to the left and right middle cingulum gyrus were lower in the smokers than in the non-smokers. The ReHo value in the precuneus (BA 23) was significantly and positively correlated with the FTND score of smokers.
Conclusion.
The ReHo values in the right superior frontal gyrus and left precuneus can be used to separate the smokers from the non-smokers. In particular, the left precuneus is a potential neuroimaging biomarker for nicotine addicts.
Introduction.
Smoking causes many kinds of diseases, such as ischemic heart disease, cerebral vascular disease, lower respiratory tract infection, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, tuberculosis, and lung cancer. Nicotine addicts often experience psychological and emotional changes. Do et al. discovered that functional coupling between striatal and cortical regions is associated with increased craving in adolescent smokers. Sutherland et al. observed that smoking is associated with convergent structural decreases in the left insula, right cerebellum, parahippocampus, multiple prefrontal cortex regions, and the thalamus. Mcclernon et al. provided evidence that abstinence-induced deficits in working memory and changes in the underlying brain function are mostly due to abstinence from nicotine rather than non-nicotine factors. These findings highlight that smoking addiction is associated with brain function changes.
In the past several years, resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging (rs-fMRI) has been increasingly used for studying neural activity in the brain. This non-invasive imaging technique offers unbiased analysis of the region-to-region interactions and voxel-by-voxel neural activity at the functional level based on the rudimentary and intrinsic activity of the resting brain. The technology has been widely applied for investigating the brain function and its changes caused by diseases.
Regional homogeneity (ReHo) is an important research method for rs-fMRI. The method reflects the local temporal homogeneity of the regional blood oxygen level-dependent signal and serves as a complement for brain neural activity in resting state. The change in the ReHo values in the smoking cessation process has been extensively investigated. Yu et al. used ReHo combined with fMRI to investigate the spontaneous neural activity in the resting state of heavy smokers; however, they did not analyze the relation between the ReHo values and the clinical characteristics of the participants. The changes in the local synchronization of spontaneous fMRI signals that occur in nicotine addicts during the resting state are rarely explored, as well as the relation between these changes and the clinical characteristics of smokers. Fagerstrom Test for Nicotine Dependence (FTND) is an important index for the clinical evaluation of a smoker’s dependence on nicotine addiction; this index has been widely used in clinical treatment and research on nicotine addiction.
In the present study, we hypothesized that the ReHo values of resting-state brain activity would be different between the smokers and the controls, and that the mechanism was related to the FTND scores. The present study aimed to explore the objective biomarker for nicotine dependence evaluation using rs-fMRI.
Materials and Methods.
Participants.
The study was approved by the Ethics Committee of Affiliated Hospital of Guilin Medical University (Guilin, Guangxi, China). A total of 14 smokers and 11 non-smoking controls were recruited for this study. All the participants signed consents to the experiment. The demographic and clinical data of subjects are summarized in Table 1. All participants were healthy males, received 12 years of education or longer, right-handed, showed no contraindications for MRI check, and exhibited no brain structural abnormality.
All smokers in the study were diagnosed based on the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders-IV, and they were smoking more than 10 cigarettes per day for 5 years or longer. The smoking participants had no marijuana, heroin, alcohol, and other drug addiction. They had no previous epilepsy, family history of epilepsy, and other psychiatric disorders. All smokers were tested by FTND.
Data Acquisition.
MRI data were collected with a 3T Siemens Verio MRI scanner at the Affiliated Hospital of Guilin Medical University using a 12-channel head coil. Participants laid in the scanner in the supine position. Cushions and forehead straps were used to immobilize the head to minimize movement. During rs-fMRI data acquisition, participants were instructed to rest with their eyes close.
Functional images were acquired using a single-shot gradient echo-echo planar imaging sequence. The imaging parameters were as follows: field of view (FOV) = 22 cm × 22 cm, slices = 43, slice thickness = 3.2 mm, no slice gap, repetition time (TR) = 2000 ms, echo time (TE) = 30 ms, flip angle (FA) = 90 with nominal resolution = 3.4 mm × 3.4 mm × 3.2 mm and matrix = 64 × 64. The scan time of each rs-fMRI was 480 s, and a total of 240 volumes were collected.
Structural images were acquired using a three-dimensional magnetization- prepared rapid gradient-echo sequence with TR = 1900 ms, TE = 2.52 ms, FA = 8, matrix = 256 × 256, FOV = 25.6 cm × 25.6 cm, slice thickness = 1.0 mm, and no slice gap. A total of 176 slices were used to cover the whole brain.
Data Analysis.
All rs-fMRI data were preprocessed using the software for Data Processing Assistant for Resting-State fMRI (DPARSF, http://www.restfmri.net/forum/DPARSF) based on Statistical Parametric Mapping (SPM8, http://www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm) and Resting-state fMRI Data Analysis Toolkit (REST, http://www.restfmri.net).
We converted the DICOM data to NIfTI format. The first 10 volumes of each time series of echo-planar images were discarded to prevent the effect of the un-equilibrium of tissue magnetization that may introduce artifacts in the signal. The remaining 230 time points of each time course image series were used for analysis. The selected time course images were subsequently corrected for slice timing and realigned to the image of the first time point for the correction of the rigid-body head movement. At any time course, data exhibiting distortion from the movement larger than 1.5 mm and rotation larger than 1.5° were discarded. The time course images (3 mm × 3 mm × 3 mm) were then spatially normalized into the standard Montreal Neurological Institute space. Data were temporal band-pass filtered (0.01–0.08 Hz) to reduce the effects of low-frequency drift and physiological high-frequency noise. The linear trend was also removed.
The ReHo analysis was performed with the REST toolkit. The ReHo maps were generated for each subject by calculating the Kendall coefficient of concordance (KCC) of the time series of a given voxel. The KCC for each voxel in the brain was calculated voxel-wise by 27 voxels (one given voxel plus its adjacent 26 voxels). The standard ReHo value for each voxel is the KCC value of the voxel/the mean of the KCC values of the whole brain. Spatial smoothing was then performed on the standardized individual ReHo maps using an isotropic Gaussian filter with a Gaussian kernel of 6 mm and full-width at half maximum (FWHM).
Statistical Analysis.
For the demographic and clinical data, two-sample t-tests were conducted to identify the difference in age and education between the smokers and the controls. The threshold for all statistical significance was set at p<0.05.
For ReHo, two-sample t-test was performed to examine the voxel-wise difference between the smokers and the controls by the REST toolbox. Voxels with p<0.01 and cluster size >54 voxels were observed, which resulted in a corrected threshold of p<0.005 determined by AlphaSim (individual voxel P value = 0.01, FWHM = 6 mm, iterations = 1000, rmm = 5, with mask). These voxels were regarded as the regions of interest (ROI) showing significant difference between the two groups.
To further explore the brain region that may be related to the clinical variable of smokers, correlation analysis was performed between FTND and mean ReHo in a sphere with 5 mm radius centered on the location with the maximal t-value in the t-map in each ROI. In the analysis, p<0.05 was considered to be statistically significant.