Title.
Functional neural changes following behavioral therapies and disulfiram for cocaine dependence.
Abstract.
A growing literature exists on neural correlates of treatment outcome. However, different types - or components of - treatment have distinct theorized mechanisms of action. And, it is not yet known how changes in neural activity across treatment relate to engagement in different treatment components. Participants with cocaine-use disorders in a randomized clinical trial received cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) plus, in a 2×2 design, contingency management (CM) or no-CM, and disulfiram or placebo. Participants performed an fMRI Stroop Task, a measure of cognitive-control, at the beginning of and after the 12-week treatment. Analyses assessed changes in Stroop-related neural activity within the sample overall and assessed how changes in Stroop-related activity correlated with measures of treatment process specific to each form of treatment (i.e., participation in CBT sessions, receipt of CM prizes, administration of disulfiram pills). Within the sample overall, compared to beginning-of-treatment, post-treatment Stroop-related neural activity was diminished in hippocampus, thalamus, cingulate, precentral, post/precentral gyrus, and precuneus and culmen regions (pFWE<.05). In separate whole-brain correlation analyses, greater reductions in Stroop-related activity were associated with more treatment engagement: ‘CBT sessions’ with precentral gyrus, inferior parietal lobule, middle and medial frontal gyrus; ‘CM prizes’ with postcentral frontal gyrus. Disulfiram ‘medication days’ were not associated with changes in Stroop-related activity. Findings suggest key process indicators of CBT and CM may be associated with functional changes in cognitive-control-related neurocircuitry.
Introduction.
Cocaine-use disorder (CUD) is associated with significant societal cost. Even with the best available treatments, many individuals with CUD cannot achieve or maintain abstinence, highlighting the need for advancements in treatments. An understanding of the mechanism of action of treatments, including neurocognitive mechanisms, could lead to improvements in existing treatments or development of new treatments. The aim of the current study is to make a preliminary attempt to relate changes in functional neural activity from beginning-of-treatment- to post-treatment to engagement with different components of treatment for cocaine use. The treatment offered in this study was a mix of cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT), contingency management (CM) and the medication disulfiram.
The treatments offered in this study are thought to have complementary clinical strengths, to address different aspects of substance use disorders (SUDs) and are hypothesized to have different mechanisms of actions. Combining several such treatments is widely accepted to improve clinical outcomes. For example, CBT, CM and disulfiram have each demonstrated enhancements in treatment efficacy relative to standard care alone, behavioral treatment controls, or placebo conditions in randomized clinical trials, and are thought to have complementary strengths and mechanisms. Specifically, CBT promotes abstinence by enhancing behavioral and cognitive coping skills as well as functional analyses of factors that contribute to continued drug use. A strength of CBT is its durability (i.e., persistent efficacy after treatment ceases), perhaps due to the focus on skill-building and greater cognitive-control over craving and drug-use behaviors. CM’s strengths and limitations are complementary to CBT’s. CM promotes treatment adherence and abstinence initiation by reinforcing target behaviors (e.g., treatment attendance, medication administration, cocaine abstinence) with money or prizes. As such, CM is a useful adjunct to enhance treatment adherence as well as initiate abstinence. However, CM’s effects tend to weaken to some extent after the reinforcement schedule has ended. While no pharmacotherapies have FDA-indication for the treatment of cocaine-use disorder, disulfiram has shown promise in some trials. Although the mechanism underlying improved cocaine-use outcomes with disulfiram is unknown, several potential mechanisms have been proposed such as increasing plasma levels of dopamine by slowing the conversion of dopamine into noradrenaline via disulfiram’s inhibition of dopamine- β-hydroxylase (DβH), reducing alcohol-precipitated relapses by inducing aversive responses to alcohol and altering cocaine’s subjective reinforcing effects.
One step towards investigating neurocognitive mechanisms of treatments for cocaine use could be to incorporate functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) measures into clinical trials for CUD. The specific fMRI task chosen should tap a specific cognitive domain, such as cognitive control, related to CUD. Disrupted cognitive-control has been proposed to contribute to initiation and maintenance of CUD through poor attentional control, attentional biases towards drug-related stimuli, impaired response inhibition, and reduced ability to regulate craving. However, the pattern of drug-induced alterations in cognitive-control-related-activity in SUDs is somewhat complex. Specifically, individuals with stimulant-use disorders differ from non-substance-using individuals on task-related functional activity in a manner that is task- and process-specific; that is, the direction of difference (hypo- versus hyper-activation) and affected anatomical regions vary by task (for review). For example, cognitive-control-related neural activity differs between active cocaine users and healthy comparison groups. Two separate studies comparing short-term abstinent (≤72 hrs.) cocaine users with healthy controls showed relatively decreased activity in cocaine users (N=15) in anterior cingulate and right prefrontal regions and relatively increased activity in cerebellar regions while performing a go/no-go task with a working memory component, while cocaine users (N=13) performed worse on a go/no-go task and showed relatively lower activity in the anterior cingulate and right insula during successful stops and greater recruitment of medial frontal gyrus, left insula and left inferior frontal gyrus (IFG) during errors. Individuals with CUD (N=14) with confirmed short-term abstinence (>72 hrs.), performing a multi-sensory Stroop task, showed greater recruitment of left dorsolateral and ventrolateral PFC (dlPFC, vlPFC) and bilateral basal ganglia and less deactivation of bilateral ventromedial PFC (vmPFC), relative to non-users (N=16).
In addition, cognitive-control-related neural activity has been shown to be altered by acute cocaine administration (e.g.,) and may vary across abstinence duration (e.g.,). Finally, impairments on cognitive-control-related neuropsychological tasks may remain following abstinence. This may be consistent with some irreversible substance-use-related neural insult, or with pre-morbid vulnerabilities in brain systems (which may have preceded substance use) remaining following prolonged cessation of substance use. Taken together, these findings highlight the sensitivity of cognitive-control-related neural activity to CUD, cocaine use, and cocaine abstinence, but also illustrate the complexity of interpreting findings. In turn, this underscores the relevance of investigating these effects in the context of treatment.
Few studies have applied neuroimaging in the context of treatment for SUDs (for review see), and several of those have demonstrated relationships between pre-treatment cognitive-control-task-related brain activations and clinical outcomes (e.g., substance use during treatment or follow-up). For example, Color-Word-Stroop-related activity in CUD individuals (N=20) initiating a range of treatments (sample combined from several randomized controlled trials (RCTs)) was associated with treatment outcome, such that greater pre-treatment Stroop-related activity in the vmPFC, left posterior cingulate cortex and right striatum correlated with longer duration of continuous abstinence during treatment. In addition, higher pre-treatment Stroop-related activity in the striatum correlated with higher percent of drug-free urines during treatment, and lower pre-treatment Stroop-related activity in the dlPFC correlated with longer treatment retention. In another study, males with cannabis use disorder (N=20) scanned prior to CBT and/or CM treatment showed diminished Stroop-related activity in regions including dlPFC and ventral striatum relative to non-users (N=20). Furthermore, higher pre-treatment Stroop-related activity in dorsal anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) and ventral striatum was associated with less cannabis use during treatment and 1-year follow-up, respectively. In individuals with CUD assessed at the beginning of inpatient detoxification treatment, higher right dorsal ACC activity during an attentional bias task (Drug Stroop; N=34;) and lower error-related negativity (an electrophysiological measure of cognitive control; N=49;) were each associated with more cocaine use at 3-month follow-up. In sum, this research relating pre-treatment functional neural activity to drug use outcomes is important, but, it does not directly address changes across treatment or relationships between neural activity and exposure to different treatment components.
A limited body of work has assessed changes in fMRI activity across treatment in substance users. One prior study from our group assessed change across behavioral treatment in a mixed substance-using outpatient sample (N=12), receiving CBT or treatment as usual. We found reduced Stroop-related activity after treatment relative to the beginning-of-treatment, in regions including the thalamus, midbrain, subthalamic nucleus, IFG, MFG and ACC. In that study, the sample size and study design limited our ability to relate changes in neural activity to components of treatment received. However, exploratory analyses within the ROIs showing significant Stroop-related change across treatment suggested associations between greater reductions in Stroop-related activity (in left middle temporal gyrus and right MFG ROIs) and more exposure to CBT sessions (Supplemental Materials in). In another study in CUD, increases in Drug-Stroop-related activity (a measure of attentional bias to drug stimuli) in the midbrain from baseline to 6-month follow-up (N=15) was associated with fewer choices to view cocaine-related stimuli at follow-up; however, since subjects were recruited from a range of treatment programs, the relative contribution of differential treatment components or types were not assessed.
Studies that have linked functional changes in stimulant users with specific pharmacotherapy have included laboratory one-day trials of the medication, rather than full clinical courses. For example, changes in Color-Word-Stroop-related activity were observed following administration of a single dose of methylphenidate (versus placebo). In individuals with CUDs (N=16) and non-users (N=15), methylphenidate reduced Stroop-related activity in dorsal ACC and also reduced activity in dlPFC in the CUD group only. Individuals with methamphetamine use disorders (N=15) exhibited increased Stroop-related activity, including in dlPFC, parietal and occipital regions relative to non-users (N=18), and methylphenidate further increased already hyperactive (relative to controls) Stroop-related activity in dlPFC, but reduced activity in parietal and occipital regions. These findings suggest that the impact of treatment on Stroop-related activity may vary across different substance using and healthy comparison groups. Taken together the existing research supports the clinical relevance of cognitive-control-related functional activity by demonstrating its associations with treatment outcome and ability to change in response to treatment for SUDs. Focusing on changes over the treatment course that relate to exposure to components of specific treatments is a novel approach to understanding mechanisms of action. This is important because effective therapies are hypothesized to change substance use by first changing brain-based cognitive processes related to substance use, including cognitive control. Prior work has demonstrated the efficacies of CBT, CM, disulfiram or combinations of these treatments on reducing cocaine use in some individuals. However, no studies have directly investigated i) how changes in cognitive-control-related neural functioning over treatment may be associated with exposure to different treatment components; and, ii) whether these treatment-component-related changes are distinct from functional brain changes associated with cocaine use outcomes.
The current study’s goal was to extend prior work and relate exposure to different components of treatment to changes in cognitive-control-related fMRI activity from beginning-of-treatment to post-treatment, in individuals with CUD. The Color-Word Stroop color-word task, a measure of cognitive control, was chosen based on the proposed centrality of this cognitive construct to SUDs and abstinence. Data were drawn from participants in an RCT, all of whom received CBT as a platform treatment. Participants were also randomized to CM vs. no-CM and to disulfiram vs. placebo. The primary goal of the analyses was to identify how exposure to components of treatment was associated with changes in cognitive-control-related brain activity across treatment. First, we used a whole-brain analysis to assessed how Stroop-related brain activity changed at post-treatment versus beginning-of-treatment in the sample overall. Second, we used separate whole brain correlation analyses to assess how changes in Stroop-related brain activity at post-treatment versus beginning-of-treatment related to specific treatment components (number of CBT sessions, CM prizes or days of disulfiram medication) and cocaine-use measures (percent days cocaine abstinence during treatment; percent cocaine-negative urines during treatment). Based on our prior work reviewed above in a mixed substance-using sample receiving CBT or treatment as usual which showed reduced Stroop-related activity at post- relative to pre-treatment in the thalamus, midbrain, subthalamic nucleus, IFG, MFG and ACC, we hypothesized that patients would show diminished Stroop-related brain activity at post-treatment relative to beginning-of-treatment in these regions. We hypothesized that greater reductions in Stroop-related activity would be observed in association with exposure to active ingredients of each treatment type as operationalized by process indicators as follows (see Table 1): (1) exposure to CBT skills training (CBT sessions attended), (2) access to reinforcement through CM (CM prizes drawn for abstinence or adherence to medication) and (3) exposure to disulfiram (total days of medication doses taken). Finally, we hypothesized, based on the structure and goals of the respective treatments, that CBT engagement specifically would be associated with greater efficiency (as indicated by lower Stroop-related activity at post-treatment vs. beginning-of-treatment) in regions associated with ‘top-down’ regulatory control (e.g., ACC, IFG, MFG), and that CM engagement (i.e., randomization to CM group; more CM prizes drawn) would be associated with greater efficiency in regions which are involved in ‘bottom-up’ circuitry (i.e., regions implicated in reward-processing and valuation, including striatum, ventromedial prefrontal cortex) which are also engaged by Stroop and other cognitive-control tasks.
Materials and Methods.
Participants.
Treatment-seeking participants were recruited to the fMRI study prior to treatment randomization in an RCT for CUD. Participants were 18 years or older, recruited from a community-based outpatient treatment center, met DSM-IV criteria for current cocaine dependence and did not meet current dependence criteria for other illicit drugs. Other exclusion criteria included lifetime psychotic or bipolar disorder, current suicidal or homicidal ideation or current medical condition that would contraindicate disulfiram treatment (e.g. hepatic or cardiac problems, hypertension, pregnancy). RCT participants were offered participation in the fMRI component if they did not report claustrophobia, colorblindness, history of severe head trauma with loss of consciousness, or metallic implants contraindicated in MRI. Of 99 RCT participants, 35 completed fMRI scans at in the beginning-of-treatment and following treatment. 26 of whom were included in the current fMRI analyses (N=9 excluded due to delayed timing of scans relative to beginning-of-treatment or post-treatment, or to insufficient treatment exposure; for details see Supplementary Materials). This study was approved by a human subjects Institutional Review Board and participants provided written informed consent prior to participation.
Treatment and Clinical Assessments.
RCT methods are reported in full elsewhere. Briefly, treatment lasted 12 weeks, and all participants were offered CBT. In addition, all participants included in the fMRI analyses were randomized to either disulfiram (N=10) or placebo (N=16) and CM (N=14) or no-CM (N=12) in a factorial design, resulting in four treatment conditions: 1) CBT+ CM + disulfiram (N=4), 2) CBT + CM + placebo (N=10), 3) CBT + disulfiram (N=6), 4) CBT + placebo (N=6). Participants were asked to attend the clinic three times per week during the 12-week protocol; medication was dispensed and urine specimens were collected at each clinic visit. All in-person treatment delivery, tracking of treatment adherence and tracking monitoring of substance use occurred in those thrice-weekly visits. Due to the limited sample sizes for the four treatment cells within the fMRI sample, analyses focused on the entire sample or comparing disulfiram versus placebo, or CM versus no-CM.
Cognitive Behavioral Therapy (CBT).
Weekly 50-minute individual CBT sessions were offered as per the CBT manual, delivered by doctoral-level clinicians with CBT experience and demonstrated competence. The primary process indicator for CBT was number of CBT sessions attended (see Table 1). CBT aims to promote abstinence by teaching and promoting practice of behavioral and cognitive control strategies (e.g., coping with craving, improving decision making skills). CBT homework, assigned at each session, offers the opportunity to practice applying the skills discussed in CBT sessions.
Contingency Management (CM).
All participants were randomly assigned to receive contingency management (CM group) or not (no-CM group). Those assigned to CM could draw at least one prize chance from a bowl each time they demonstrated abstinence (submitted a cocaine-free urine specimen) or pill adherence (staff witnessed ingestion of study capsule). Consistent with previously established procedures, the number of CM draws per reinforced behavior (abstinence, pill adherence) escalated (up to a maximum of 7 draws) with each consecutive demonstration of abstinence or adherence. If patients missed a scheduled visit or failed to submit a cocaine-negative urine, the number of prize draws for subsequent reinforced behaviors would drop back down to one (for CM methods details, see Supplementary Methods and. The primary process indicator for exposure to CM in these analyses was the sum of total prizes drawn across treatment (‘number of CM prizes’; Table 1).
Disulfiram.
All participants were randomly assigned to either disulfiram (250 mg daily) or identical placebo capsules, administered in a double-blind manner. This disulfiram dose was associated with reduced cocaine use in previous trials. Medication or placebo pill adherence was tracked by observed medication administration at thrice-weekly visits, plus patient self-report for take-home doses. This combination of observed and self-reported adherence was used as the primary process indicator (‘days of medication’; Table 1) for disulfiram treatment within the group randomized to disulfiram. A riboflavin tracer in the pills indicated high consistency with self-report. All participants were warned of negative consequences of drinking alcohol on disulfiram, strongly discouraged from drinking alcohol during the study, and told that their capsules would be withheld if their breath samples tested positive for alcohol.
Substance-use assessments.
Baseline assessments included the Addiction Severity Index (ASI. Thrice weekly during treatment, participants were assessed with urine toxicology and alcohol-breath screens, had study capsules dispensed (disulfiram or placebo) and clinical symptoms monitored. Self-reports of day-by-day use of cocaine, alcohol, and other drugs were collected weekly during treatment, using the Timeline Followback method. When sessions were missed or the participant did not complete treatment, self-report data were collected for the missed data-collection days at subsequent sessions. Adverse events and blood pressure were tracked weekly during treatment. Consistent with our prior work, primary clinical outcome variables were percent of cocaine-negative urines and self-reported days of abstinence during treatment.
Clinical Data Analyses.
Indicators of cocaine use within-treatment were assessed with ANOVAs including medication (disulfiram, placebo) and CM (CM, no-CM) as between-subject factors (see Table 2). Clinical outcomes for the parent RCT sample are reported elsewhere. Briefly, there were consistent effects favoring CM over no-CM, with mixed findings for disulfiram.
fMRI Methods.
Participants were administered a measure of cognitive-control, the event-related fMRI Color-Word Stroop task, on two occasions: prior to or in the beginning-of-treatment (days between start of study treatment and ‘beginning-of-treatment’ scan: M=3 days, SD=5, range= 6 days prior to treatment start −12 days into treatment) and following the end of the 12-week treatment (i.e., post-treatment and prior to 3-month follow-up (days between end of treatment and post-treatment scan: M=20 days, SD=20, range=1–61 days). On each trial, participants were asked to name the ink color of color-words presented in congruent (e.g., “RED” in red ink) or incongruent colors (e.g., “RED” in blue ink; see Supplemental Methods for task details).
Stroop mean response times, collected out-of-scanner at time of scanning, were analyzed in SPSS with mixed model ANOVAs including session (beginning-of-treatment, post-treatment) and trial type (incongruent, congruent) as within-subject factors and medication (disulfiram, placebo) and CM (CM, no-CM) conditions as between-subject factors. Stroop errors on incongruent trials were analyzed with mixed-model ANOVAs including session as a within-subject factor and medication and CM conditions as between-subject factors.
fMRI data acquisition and pre-processing steps were consistent with our prior work (e.g.,; see Supplemental Methods for details). For second-level random-effects analyses, the contrast of interest was the ‘change in Stroop-effect’ calculated as [(Incongruentpost>Congruentpost)>(Incongruentpre>Congruentpre)], which assessed changes in Stroop-effect-related activity at post-treatment versus beginning-of-treatment. fMRI results were family-wise-error-corrected at two-tailed pFWE<0.05.
To address the primary research question regarding how neural correlates of cognitive-control change across treatment and how these changes relate to engagement with different treatment components, the following approach was taken. First, changes in fMRI Stroop effect were assessed at the whole brain level (Table 3A). Second, separate whole-brain correlation analyses were carried out between the ‘change in Stroop effect’ contrast and the following indicators of treatment engagement: a) CBT sessions (entire sample, N=26); b) CM prizes drawn (subsample randomized to CM, N=14); and c) days of study medication taken (subsample randomized to disulfiram, N=10) (description of variables Table 1; results Table 3B). All analyses were familywise error corrected for multiple comparisons (pFWE = .05)
Since level of cocaine abstinence during treatment could affect ‘change in Stroop-effect’ across treatment, a separate whole-brain correlation was run between the ‘change in Stroop effect’ contrast and cocaine use within-treatment (i.e., percent days self-reported abstinence during treatment; percent cocaine-negative urines during treatment) (Table 3B). To check whether the regions associated with engagement in different aspects of treatment overlapped or were simply reflections of the same regions associated with cocaine abstinence during treatment, the separate correlation analyses were entered into formal conjunction analyses (see Supplemental Material for detailed methods). For all fMRI correlation analyses, if variables were not normally distributed, rank-order correlations were used as a non-parametric alternative.
Additional analyses addressed whether ‘change in Stroop-effect’ differed by randomly assigned treatment condition in separate analyses: a) CM versus no-CM groups, b) disulfiram versus placebo groups. Since treatment group differences in ‘change in Stroop-effect’ could be influenced by beginning-of-treatment group differences, potentially confounding beginning-of-treatment differences between treatment groups were assessed by comparing beginning-of-treatment Stroop-effect (Incongruentpre >Congruentpre trials) by CM (CM>no-CM) and medication (disulfiram>placebo) randomization status.