Title.
Decreased Functional Connectivity of Insular Cortex in Drug Naïve First Episode Schizophrenia: In Relation to Symptom Severity.
Abstract.
Background.
This study was to examine the insular cortical functional connectivity in drug naïve patients with first episode schizophrenia and to explore the relationship between the connectivity and the severity of clinical symptoms.
Methods.
Thirty-seven drug naïve patients with schizophrenia and 25 healthy controls were enrolled in this study. A seed-based approach was used to analyze the resting-state functional imaging data. Insular cortical connectivity maps were bilaterally extracted for group comparison and validated by voxel-based morphometry (VBM) analysis. Clinical symptoms were measured using the Positive and Negative Syndrome Scale (PANSS).
Results.
There were significant reductions in the right insular cortical connectivity with the Heschl’s gyrus, anterior cingulate cortex (ACC), and caudate (p’s<0.001) in the patient group compared with the healthy control (HC) group. Reduced right insular cortical connectivity with the Heschl’s gyrus was further confirmed in the VBM analysis (FDR corrected p<0.05). Within the patient group, there was a significant positive relationship between the right insula-Heschl’s connectivity and PANSS general psychopathology scores (r = 0.384, p = 0.019).
Conclusion.
Reduced insula-Heschl’s functional connectivity is present in drug naïve patients with first episode schizophrenia, which might be related to the manifestation of clinical symptoms.
1. Introduction.
Schizophrenia, a severe psychiatric disorder characterized by positive and negative symptoms and cognitive deficits, has long been hypothesized as a disorder of brain connectivity. Disrupted brain development can lead to abnormal neural connectivity or network, which may cause abnormal information processing and integration, and clinical symptoms including psychosis. It has been well established that the insula cortex is an anatomical gateway between the visual, olfactory, auditory, somatosensory cortices and the limbic structures. Secluded deep within the lateral sulcus of the human brain, the insular cortex is part of an extended network of neuronal pathways connecting to the anterior cingulate cortex, temporal lobe, parietal lobe, hippocampus, amygdala, olfactory cortex, and thalamus. The ventromedial prefrontal cortex, posterior cingulate cortex, bilateral inferior parietal cortex and middle temporal lobe are parts of default mode network (DMN). The central executive network (CEN) consists of mainly the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex and posterior parietal cortex. The salience network (SN) includes primarily the anterior insular cortex and dorsal anterior cingulate cortex. Apparentlythe insular cortex functions as a multimodal sensory integration region. In addition, the insular cortex plays an important role in emotion processing including interoceptive awareness, anticipation, evaluation of emotional stimuli, self-awareness, episodic memory, executive function, attention, and saliency processing.
Recently, the insula cortex has attracted significant attention in schizophrenia research. The aberrant functional and structural alterations in insular cortex have been frequently reported in schizophrenia including reduced gray matter volume, thickness, and surface area, decreased white matter integrity (measured by fractional anisotropy or mean diffusivity), and altered functional activity under various tasks or during resting state. Changes in the SN may be one of the most important findings among all insular cortex related networks in schizophrenia. Recently, the anterior insular cortex within the SN has been demonstrated to be crucial to modulate DMN /CEN interactions in patients with schizophrenia. Manoliu et al. also found that the dependence of CEN and DMN interactions on SN’s right anterior insular activity is altered in patients with schizophrenia during acute psychosis or psychotic remission. Furthermore, insular cortical dysfunction might be associated with core symptoms of schizophrenia. Aberrant salience network activity in the insular and cingulate cortices has been implicated in the development of positive symptoms of schizophrenia such as delusions and hallucinations due to an inappropriate assignment of salience to stimuli that would normally be considered irrelevant. Patients with schizophrenia are usually suffer from impaired insight; both awareness and mental state attribution, two core components of insight, are associated with the function of insular cortex.
Previous studies have provided compelling evidence supporting the critical role of insular cortex in schizophrenia. However, most studies examining the functional connectivity between insular cortex and other brain areas were in schizophrenia patients treated with antipsychotics. The potential confounding effect of antipsychotic treatment on the brain functional connectivity has been well established. The purpose of the present study was to examine the insular cortical functional connectivity and its relationship with the severity of clinical symptoms in drug naïve, first episode schizophrenic patients.
2. Methods.
2.1. Subjects.
The study was approved by the Ethics Committee of the First Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou University. All subjects provided written informed consent to participate in the study. Subjects were recruited from the consecutive admissions to the inpatient unit between November 2011 and December 2012. Inclusion criteria included: 1) diagnosis of schizophrenia according to the criteria of DSM-IV; 2) 18–45 years old; 3) in the age rangenever treated with antipsychotic medications or other psychotropics. The diagnosis of schizophrenia was confirmed by a research psychiatrist (X.S.) using the Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV Axis I Disorders (SCID-IV). Exclusion criteria were: 1) history of alcohol or other substance use; 2) history of brain injury; 3) any ongoing significant medical conditions. Healthy control subjects were recruited from the local community through advertisements. The same research psychiatrist (X.S.) conducted a comprehensive clinical interview to rule out any psychiatric conditions in healthy controls. A complete medical history, physical examination, and routine laboratory tests were obtained from all subjects to rule out possible medical conditions. All subjects were right-handed.
2.2. Clinical symptom measurement.
Symptoms of schizophrenia were assessed for all patients using the Positive and Negative Syndrome Scale (PANSS), which includes 3 subscales: positive symptoms, negative symptoms and general psychopathology. The PANSS was administered by the same rater (J.G.) throughout the study.
2.3. Image acquisition.
On the same day after clinical assessment and before taking any antipsychotic or other psychotropic medications, all participants were scanned on a 3.0 Tesla Scanner (Signa HDxt 3T GEHCGEHC) at the Magnetic Resonance Center of the First Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou University. A 6 minute ‘resting-state’ functional MRI scan was obtained, comprising of 180 time points of whole-brain functional (EPI) volumes (TR = 2000 ms; TE = 30ms; flip angle = 90; 34 contiguous AC–PC aligned axial slices; matrix = 64×64; FOV = 22 cm; acquisition voxel size = 3.4mm×3.4mm×4 mm). During this scan that acquired all neuroimaging data, participants were instructed to rest without moving. The wakefulness of the subject was verified by self-report at the end of the scan. T1-weighted Spoiled Gradient Echo (SPGR) images were also collected for the purposes of anatomical localization. The acquisition protocol included the following pulse sequence and parameters: repetition time (TR) = 12ms, echo time (TE) = 4.5ms, inversion time (TI) = 1100ms, flip angle 7°, field of view (FOV) = 256×256×220 mm3, matrix size 256×256, slice thickness 1mm contiguous, and scan time 17 min.
2.4. Image processing.
Imaging data were coded and catalogued before being transferred to the Psychotic Disorders Program of the University of Massachusetts Medical School (UMMS) for blinded analysis. AFNI was used for image preprocessing (http://www.afni.nimh.gov/afni), performing slice timing correction for interleaved acquisition (using Fourier interpolation), motion correction (by aligning each volume to a “base” image [middle volume] using Fourier interpolation) and de-spiking (detection and reduction of extreme time series outliers using a hyperbolic tangent function). All other data processing was carried out using FMRIB Software Library (FSL) (http://www.fmrib.ox.ac.uk), including spatial smoothing (FWHM = 6 mm), mean-based intensity normalization of all volumes, temporal bandpass filtering (highpass temporal filtering: Gaussian-weighted least-squares straight line fitting, with sigma = 100.0 s; Gaussian lowpass temporal filtering HWHM 2.8 s), and pre-whitening. Each individual’s time series were spatially normalized by registration to the MNI152 (Montreal Neurological Institute) template with 2mm3 resolution, using a 12 degree of freedom affine transformation. Nine nuisance covariates (time series for global signal intensity, white matter, cerebrospinal fluid, and six motion parameters) were regressed out of the data to minimize the contributions of artifactual physiological signals (e.g., cardiac and respiratory cycles) using the general linear model implemented in FSL program FEAT. The FreeSurfer software (http://surfer.nmr.mgh.harvard.edu/) was used to segment T1-weighted SPGR images into cortical and subcortical gray and white matter regions, as well as total intracranial volume, for each subject.
Functional connectivity was examined using a seed-based approach. The left and right insular seed regions were generated using the Harvard-Oxford atlas, co-localized to the MNI space used in this study. For each participant, we calculated the mean time series of each seed by averaging across all voxels within the seed. A voxel-wise correlation map was generated to each of these seed-based time course reference signals. This correlation map was r-to-Z transformed in order to generate a standardized representation. Each of the remaining cortical and subcortical gray matter regions of the Harvard-Oxford atlas were then used as a mask to determine the average resting state correlation (Z-score) between the insular cortex and each ipsilateral gray matter region in each subject.
2.5. Statistical analysis.
The data were analyzed using SPSS 20.0 (SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL). Demographic and clinical characteristics were reported using descriptive statistics. The Shapiro-Wilk test was used to check the normality of the data. Group comparisons were performed using the independent samples t-test for continuous variables and Chi-square or Fisher’s exact test for categorical variables.
Connectivity values (Z-scores) of the insular cortex with ipsilateral cortical ROIs were extracted for group comparison, using the independent samples t-test. Bonferroni corrections considering the number of ROIs were used to define the significance level: p<0.05/48 = 0.001. Insula connectivity maps (Z-score maps) were subjected to voxel-based morphometry (VBM) analysis. To further explore the regions that show group difference in insular connectivity. A false discovery rate (FDR) corrected p<0.05 was used to define the overall significant level.
Peasson correlation analysis was used to examine the relationship beteween insular connectivity and clinical symptoms as measured by the PANSS; the significance level was set at p<0.05.