Title.
Abnormal asymmetries in subcortical brain volume in schizophrenia.
Abstract.
Subcortical structures, which include the basal ganglia and parts of the limbic system, have key roles in learning, motor control and emotion, but also contribute to higher-order executive functions. Prior studies have reported volumetric alterations in subcortical regions in schizophrenia. Reported results have sometimes been heterogeneous, and few large-scale investigations have been conducted. Moreover, few large-scale studies have assessed asymmetries of subcortical volumes in schizophrenia. Here, as a work completely independent of a study performed by the ENIGMA consortium, we conducted a large-scale multisite study of subcortical volumetric differences between patients with schizophrenia and controls. We also explored the laterality of subcortical regions to identify characteristic similarities and differences between them. T1-weighted images from 1680 healthy individuals and 884 patients with schizophrenia, obtained with 15 imaging protocols at 11 sites, were processed with FreeSurfer. Group differences were calculated for each protocol and meta-analyzed. Compared with controls, patients with schizophrenia demonstrated smaller bilateral hippocampus, amygdala, thalamus and accumbens volumes as well as intracranial volume, but larger bilateral caudate, putamen, pallidum and lateral ventricle volumes. We replicated the rank order of effect sizes for subcortical volumetric changes in schizophrenia reported by the ENIGMA consortium. Further, we revealed leftward asymmetry for thalamus, lateral ventricle, caudate and putamen volumes, and rightward asymmetry for amygdala and hippocampal volumes in both controls and patients with schizophrenia. Also, we demonstrated a schizophrenia-specific leftward asymmetry for pallidum volume. These findings suggest the possibility of aberrant laterality in neural pathways and connectivity patterns related to the pallidum in schizophrenia.
Introduction.
Patients with schizophrenia have volumetric abnormalities in both cortical and subcortical brain regions, which are closely related to characteristic symptoms and behaviors. Patients with schizophrenia demonstrate both positive and negative symptoms as well as cognitive impairment, and many of these characteristic symptoms have been related to structural brain alterations and disrupted interregional connections. Subcortical structures, which include the basal ganglia and parts of the limbic system, are integrally involved in learning and memory, as well as many primitive functions such as motor control, attention and emotion. Further, they also have important roles in higher-order executive functions including inhibitory control and working memory through their structural and functional connectivity with prefrontal cortices.
Prior studies have revealed volumetric alterations in the subcortical regions in schizophrenia. For example, many studies report bilateral hippocampal volume reductions in patients with schizophrenia. Likewise, on average, individuals with schizophrenia demonstrate lower volumes in the left, right or both thalamic regions, and decreased left thalamic volume has even been reported in individuals experiencing first-episode psychosis. On the other hand, results of prior studies on basal ganglia volume in schizophrenia have been somewhat heterogeneous. Stegmayer et al. reported decreased gray matter density in the right ventral striatum in patients with schizophrenia having severe emotional dysregulation, while Ha et al. showed increased gray matter concentrations in the right striatum in schizophrenia. Perhaps owing to differences in antipsychotic medications or duration of illness, the right putamen volume has been reported as being increased in schizophrenia in one study, while another study demonstrated decreased gray matter volume in the left putamen in recurrently ill patients with schizophrenia. Thus, individual studies may reach different conclusions, suggesting added value of multi-cohort meta-analyses.
Brain lateralization is considered highly related to human psychological and behavioral characteristics. Initially, it was widely believed that the left hemisphere supported language and logical thinking, while the right hemisphere was involved to a greater extent in creativity and intuition. In recent years, anatomical and functional brain lateralization has been assessed using brain-mapping approaches, and various investigations have revealed the lateralization of subcortical regional volumes in healthy subjects. For example, rightward asymmetry has been commonly reported for the hippocampus and amygdala. In contrast, results on lateralization of regional volumes for the thalamus, lateral ventricles, caudate nuclei, putamen, globus pallidus and nucleus accumbens are so far controversial and non-conclusive.
Altered structural lateralization in schizophrenia has recently been investigated. Many studies have shown differences in hemispheric asymmetries of cortical volume between patients with schizophrenia and controls. In addition, changes in subcortical structural asymmetry in schizophrenia have also been demonstrated. For example, exaggerated rightward asymmetry of the thalamus, similar but exaggerated rightward asymmetry of the hippocampus and reduced rightward asymmetry of the amygdala have been reported. However, few comprehensive studies have been conducted and little is known on the lateralization of subcortical structures in schizophrenia.
Conventional meta-analyses have been used to assess the overall evidence for structural alterations in schizophrenia. However, this method has some disadvantages. Studies included in a conventional meta-analysis have varying designs, and often have different populations, conditions and analysis methods. Thus, the overall effects may be weakened.
Multi-centered large-scale research is very important for elucidating the neural basis of psychiatric disorders such as schizophrenia, as some single studies may have only small effects, or the confidence interval on the magnitude of the effects may be wide in smaller cohorts. In this context, the Enhancing Neuro Imaging Genetics through Meta-Analysis (ENIGMA) Consortium was organized by neuroscience and genetics researchers from worldwide, to work together on imaging genetics research for psychiatric disorders. Several reports have already been published by the consortium. Recently, van Erp et al. published an original article about the analysis of brain morphology in schizophrenia. They identified subcortical regional volumes that are different between patients with schizophrenia and controls, across 15 cohorts, and ordered them by effect sizes. Patients with schizophrenia showed smaller-than-normal volumes in the hippocampus, amygdala, thalamus and accumbens as well as smaller-than-normal intracranial volume (ICV). On the other hand, these patients showed larger-than-normal pallidum and lateral ventricle volumes.
In our current study, as a research project by a Japanese consortium, the COCORO (Cognitive Genetics Collaborative Research Organization), we conducted a multisite large-scale cross-sectional investigation of subcortical regional volumetric differences between patients with schizophrenia and healthy subjects by using meta-analytic methods similar to those of the van Erp et al. study. As a new line of work, we also separately assessed group differences in each hemispheric regional volume. Further, we explored the asymmetry of subcortical regional volumes both in healthy subjects and in patients with schizophrenia, and investigated possible alterations of subcortical asymmetry in schizophrenia. The first aim of our study was to investigate whether the results of the work by van Erp et al. could be replicated. The second aim was to elucidate characteristic similarities and differences in subcortical volumetric lateralization between patients with schizophrenia and healthy individuals.
Materials and methods.
Sample subjects and imaging.
A total of 3208 individuals took part in the current large-scale cross-sectional cohort project—the overall cohort consisted of 2091 healthy controls and 1117 patients with schizophrenia from 11 sites in COCORO. Participants did not overlap between the van Erp et al. study and our current study. Subject inclusion and exclusion criteria by site are described in Supplementary Method 1. Written informed consent was obtained from each subject before participation. This procedure was approved by each local institutional review board. Each participating site conducted magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scanning and obtained T1-weighted images with one or more scanner(s) and imaging protocol(s). A combination of one scanner and one imaging protocol was defined as one ‘protocol', and 26 protocols were registered in the current study. Detailed imaging parameters for each protocol are shown in Supplementary Table 1. For accurate exploration of brain hemispheric characteristics including lateralization, we investigated the possibility of left–right errors derived from MRI data format conversion. The details are described in Supplementary Method 2.
Imaging processing, quality control and protocol selection.
The procedures described in this section are summarized in Figure 1. In the first quality control step, original T1-weighted images were checked by visual inspection. We excluded images with insufficient brain coverage (field-of-view problem), those with low signal-to-noise ratios or any artifacts (for example, motion artifacts and magnetic susceptibility artifacts) and those with any abnormal organic findings (for example, large cerebellar cysts and cavum septum pellucidum). Through this process, 306 healthy subjects and 167 patients with schizophrenia were excluded. Next, T1-weighted imaging data that had passed the first quality control step were processed with FreeSurfer software version 5.3 (http://surfer.nmr.mgh.harvard.edu), as described previously. Through this procedure, we obtained images of subcortical segmentation and regional volumes (for the bilateral lateral ventricles, thalamus, caudate, putamen, globus pallidus, hippocampus, amygdala, accumbens and the ICV). Fourteen healthy controls and three patients with schizophrenia were rejected owing to the failure of FreeSurfer processing. After that, two independent researchers visually inspected each segmentation image to exclude images with poor parcellation. One patient with schizophrenia was excluded by this approach. A total of 14 healthy controls and four patients with schizophrenia were excluded in the second quality control step (the quality control of FreeSurfer analysis). After the two quality control steps (inspection of original MRI data and screening for successful FreeSurfer processing), 1771 healthy subjects and 946 patients with schizophrenia remained for possible analysis in the study (available data remained as shown in Supplementary Table 2). Among potential candidates, protocols with less than 50 total participants and those with less than 10 participants in either diagnostic group were excluded before the following meta-analysis, to minimize undue effects of very small groups. Finally, 1680 healthy individuals and 884 patients with schizophrenia from 15 protocols remained for inclusion (Table 1).
The mean and standard deviation of age across protocols for healthy controls were 34.5±12.7 and for patients were 34.8±11.7 years. As for sex ratio, 52% of the controls and 50% of the patients were male. Supplementary Figures 1a–q and 2a–q demonstrate regional volume histograms by site in healthy subjects and in patients with schizophrenia, respectively. Subgroup sample sizes of the van Erp et al. study and the current study are compared in Supplementary Table 3.
Alterations of subcortical regional volumes in schizophrenia.
All linear regression analyses were conducted using SPSS version 19.0.0 (SPSS, Chicago, IL, USA), and all meta-analyses were performed using Review Manager version 5.3 (The Nordic Cochrane Centre, Cochrane Collaboration, Copenhagen, Denmark) and Metasoft software. For definition of statistical significance, we set the type-I error rate (P-value) at 0.05. Moreover, a Bonferroni correction was applied to the statistical results to reduce type-I errors generated by multiple comparisons. First, means and standard deviations of subcortical regional volumes and ICV were calculated for each protocol for each diagnostic group. Second, we examined group differences in regional volumes within each protocol. Group differences in subcortical regional volumes were investigated using a univariate linear regression analysis including sex, age and ICV as nuisance covariates. For group differences in ICV, only sex and age were included as nuisance covariates in the regression analysis. Finally, we performed meta-analysis of group differences in each regional volume. The group differences and standard errors for each protocol were entered into a random-effect model meta-analysis, and overall group differences and standard errors were obtained. For each brain region, Cohen's d effect sizes were calculated from the overall group contrast. The analytical methods used in the van Erp et al. study from the ENIGMA Schizophrenia Working Group (ENIGMA-SZ) were followed in this analysis.
Laterality of subcortical regional volumes.
To assess laterality for each regional volume, we used a laterality index (LI), defined as the ratio [(left−right)/(left+right)] this is commonly used to evaluate brain structural asymmetry. LIs can range from −1 to 1 and a positive LI means a leftward asymmetry.
First, the means and standard deviations of LIs of subcortical regional volumes were calculated for each protocol for each diagnostic group. One-sample tests were conducted to evaluate whether mean LIs were significantly different from zero. Second, we performed a separate meta-analysis for LIs in each group. Mean LIs and standard errors in each protocol were entered into a random-effect model meta-analysis, and overall mean LIs in each group were obtained. LIs have similar characteristics to effect sizes; that is, both of them are referenced and indexed to zero (thus, LIs themselves can be meta-analyzed). For each group and each brain region, Cohen's d effect sizes for LIs were calculated from the overall average.
Third, group differences in LIs within each protocol were examined using a univariate linear regression, which included sex and age as nuisance covariates, as LIs may not distribute normally. Fourth, we performed a meta-analysis of group differences in LIs. Group differences in LIs and standard errors in each protocol were included into a random-effect model meta-analysis, and overall group differences in LIs were obtained. Cohen's d effect sizes for differences in LIs between groups were calculated from the overall group contrast. Using a similar method as used in the van Erp et al. study, we also conducted a power analysis to estimate the sample sizes required to detect the given effect sizes at a power of 0.80 and a one-tailed significance level of 0.05, with G*Power version 3.1.9.2.
Finally, as an additional analysis, we performed a meta-analysis of group differences in LIs using FMRIB's Integrated Registration and Segmentation Tool (FIRST) in the FMRIB Software Library (FSL) version 5.0.8 (http://fsl.fmrib.ox.ac.uk/fsl/fslwiki/FIRST), as LIs for subcortical volumes calculated with FreeSurfer can be different from those calculated using FSL. Of the 2564 participants (1680 healthy controls and 884 patients with schizophrenia) included in the main analyses, 29 subjects (18 controls and 11 patients) failed to be processed with FSL. After that, each segmentation image was visually checked for exclusion of poor parcellation. Fifty-eight subjects (35 controls and 23 patients) were excluded by this approach. Thus, a total of 2477 participants (1627 controls and 850 patients) were entered into the additional analysis.