Title.
Subcortical local functional hyperconnectivity in cannabis dependence.
Abstract.
Background.
Cannabis abuse has been associated with psychopathology, including negative emotionality and a higher risk of psychosis, particularly with early age of initiation. However, the mechanisms underlying this association are poorly understood. Because aberrant dopamine (DA) signaling is implicated in cannabis-associated psychopathology, we hypothesized that regular cannabis abuse (CA) would be associated with altered resting functional connectivity in dopamine midbrain-striatal circuits.
Methods.
We examined resting brain activity of subcortical regions in 441 young adults from the Human Connectome Project, including 30 CA meeting DSM criteria for dependence, and 30 controls matched on age, sex, education, BMI, anxiety, depression, and alcohol/tobacco usage.
Results.
Across all subjects, local functional connectivity density (lFCD) hubs in subcortical regions were most prominent in ventral striatum, hippocampus, amygdala, dorsal midbrain, and the posterior-ventral brainstem. As hypothesized, CA showed markedly increased lFCD relative to controls in ventral striatum (where nucleus accumbens is located) and midbrain (where substantia nigra/ventral tegmental nuclei are located) but also in brainstem and lateral thalamus. These effects were observed in the absence of significant differences in subcortical volumes, and were most pronounced in the individuals who began cannabis use earliest in life and who reported high levels of negative emotionality.
Conclusions.
Together, these findings suggest that chronic cannabis abuse is associated with changes in resting brain function, particularly in dopaminergic nuclei implicated in psychosis but that are also critical for habit formation and reward processing. These results shed light on neurobiological differences that may be relevant to psychopathology associated with cannabis use.
Introduction.
Cannabis is one of the most widely used addictive substances in the United States, with 44% of individuals over the age of 12 reporting cannabis use at least once in their lifetime. Despite current efforts to legalize cannabis, little is known about the long-term effects of cannabis abuse (CA) on brain function and neuropsychiatric outcomes. Of particular concern has been the association between regular CA and psychiatric symptoms such as amotivation, negative emotionality and a heightened risk for psychosis. Indeed, CA was associated with up to a 6 fold increase in the risk of schizophrenia in early-onset users and with the use of cannabis with high THC. The increased risk remains after controlling for other substances of abuse and for familial risk of psychosis. Aberrant dopaminergic function in the midbrain-striatal circuitry, a hallmark feature of schizophrenia, may underlie this association. Accordingly, CA with genetic variants that confer high midbrain-striatal dopamine (DA), including the DRD2 rs1076560 T allele, the DAT1 3′ 9-repeat allele, and the AKT1 rs2494732 C allele, have an increased risk of psychosis compared with CA that do not have these genetic variants. However, the effects of chronic CA on the functional organization of subcortical regions modulated by DA, and their relevance for psychiatric symptoms, is poorly understood.
Resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging (rsfMRI) offers a non-invasive method for probing the functional connectedness of neural circuits. By measuring correlations among spontaneous low-frequency blood-oxygen-level dependent (BOLD) signals, studies have revealed the involvement of functional changes in subcortical circuits in psychiatric diseases including schizophrenia. For instance, functional connectivity between reward processing regions, such as nucleus accumbens (NAc) and orbitofrontal cortex (OFC), appears to be related to disrupted DA function, and as such, has clinical relevance: higher intrinsic connectivity correlated with amotivation syndrome and with the duration that schizophrenia had been left untreated. Intriguingly, a similar pattern of NAc-OFC hyperconnectivity was reported in CA. However, the relevance of these effects for psychopathology in CA is unknown. Further, prior investigations in CA have relied mainly on seed-based connectivity analyses.
In contrast, local functional connectivity density (lFCD; the size of a local cluster of correlated voxels) is a data-driven method for identifying functional hubs in the brain. lFCD accounts for up to 70% of resting brain metabolism, and therefore is an index of local brain activity that has superior spatiotemporal resolution to PET imaging. We recently used this method to identify functional connectivity changes that were associated with cognitive and mood-related behaviors in heavy drinkers. To our knowledge, no studies have examined the effects of CA on subcortical functional hub organization, and its relevance to negative emotionality, which is elevated in CA and schizophrenia. Intriguingly, recent studies using a very similar approach found subcortical hyperconnectivity in a cohort of 95 individuals with Schizophrenia. We hypothesized similar effects may be observed in CA. To test this hypothesis, we took advantage of the large dataset produced by the Human Connectome Project. While the HCP does not have targeted measures that specifically assess psychosis, they do offer measures of negative emotionality, a symptom shared between CA and Schizophrenia that we have previously found to be associated with subcortical dopaminergic function in CA. Thus, while the present study does not directly study individuals with schizophrenia, negative emotionality is relevant in light of the emerging view that psychiatric disorders represent clusters of symptoms and traits that are elevated over a spectrum of normal functioning, and that elevated negative emotionality predicts development of psychosis. We were particularly interested in one aspect of negative emotionality: symptoms of alienation (beliefs that others wish them harm, and that they are deceived by friends), after our recent investigation demonstrated that this may be particularly affected in CA and associated with aberrant brain function.
Materials and Methods.
Participants.
We analyzed data from the S500 release (https://www.humanconnectome.org/documentation/S500/index.html) of the WU-Minn HCP Consortium. We only included participants who had a) complete structural and rsfMRI imaging data that passed a quality assurance check, and b) complete measures of cognitive function and emotionality (total n=441 participants). The HCP initiative studied young adults aged 22–35 from a wide range of backgrounds and behavioral profiles representative of the population at large. Thus, while all participants are considered generally healthy, participants with sub-clinical psychiatric symptomatology and recreational drug use are included.
Of the 441 participants, 36 met the DSM-IV criteria for cannabis dependence (see Supplementary Material for a description). Three participants were excluded for comorbid alcohol dependence and one was excluded for anxiety and depression ratings > 3 SD from the group mean. Recent studies have indicated that it is critical in studies of cannabis abuse to select a well-matched control group, particularly on measures of alcohol and tobacco usage, e.g.,. Therefore, we matched groups on age, sex, education, BMI, anxiety, depression, and alcohol and tobacco usage (we calculated composite tobacco/alcohol usage the same way as a recent study of HCP data; see Supplementary Material and). Two subjects from each group were excluded to ensure groups were matched on tobacco usage (Supplementary Material), therefore the final sample included 30 CA and 30 controls; demographics and statistical tests are presented in Table 1.
Behavioral Measures of Interest.
We examined data related to cognitive function and negative emotionality, given the interest in potential chronic effects of cannabis in these domains. Participants completed various NIH toolbox measures as part of the HCP. We were particularly interested in relating the current work to our previous findings that CA are vulnerable to feelings of alienation, i.e. the belief that others wish them harm, and that they are betrayed or deceived by friends. However, our previous work used the Multidimensional Personality Questionnaire (MPQ) and this was not administered as part of the HCP protocol. Therefore, we attempted to find analogous measures for the three main domains of the MPQ: stress reactivity, aggression, and alienation. For stress reactivity, we used the “perceived stress” measure; for aggression, we averaged together the Z-scores of “Anger Hostility” and “Anger Aggression” (i.e., one’s own behavior in the anger and aggressive domains); and for alienation we averaged together the Z-scores of “Perceived Hostility” and “Perceived Rejection” (i.e., how one perceives others behaving towards them). We then averaged together these stress, aggression, and alienation measures together for a composite negative emotionality score. All three domains were included to examine if the effects were specific to alienation. More comprehensive descriptions of cognitive and emotional measures are available in Supplementary Material and https://wiki.humanconnectome.org/display/PublicData/HCP+Data+Dictionary+Public+500+Subject+Release.
MRI image acquisition and preprocessing.
All brain images were collected on a Siemens 3T “connectome Skyra” scanner with a 32-channel coil at Washington University in St. Louis. T1- and T2-weighted anatomical scans were acquired (FOV=224 mm, matrix=320, 256 slices, 0.7 mm isotropic voxels). rsfMRI scans were acquired with an EPI sequence (Multiband factor = 8, TR = 720 ms, TE = 33.1 ms, flip angle = 52°, FOV = 208 mm, 104 × 90 matrix, 72 slices of 2 mm isotropic voxels, no gap). Two sessions were completed with two rsfMRI scans (one LR and one RL phase encoding) in each session. Each scan was 14:33 min, for a total of 54:15 min. For rsfMRI, participants were instructed to lie with eyes open, to relax and look at a white cross on a dark background, think of nothing and to not fall asleep. For further details on image acquisition, see https://www.humanconnectome.org/documentation/S500/HCP_S500+MEG2_Release_Appendix_I.pdf.
For analysis of rsfMRI data, we used the “minimal preprocessing” datasets (hp2000_clean.nii files), where preprocessing included: a) gradient distortion correction, b) rigid body realignment, c) field map processing, d) nonlinear normalization to MNI space, e) high-pass filtering with independent component analysis (ICA)-based denoising, and f) brain masking. In our own subsequent preprocessing, we removed timepoints that were severely affected by motion using a ‘scrubbing’ approach (Supplementary Material). Remaining motion effects on fMRI time series were regressed out using the six translation and rotation regressors. Finally, band-pass temporal filtering (0.01–0.10 Hz) was applied. lFCD was computed separately on each of the four runs of processed, unsmoothed data, masked by each participant’s FreeSurfer subcortical parcellation (wmparc.2.nii.gz), which included bilateral thalamus, caudate, putamen, pallidum, amygdala, nucleus accumbens, hippocampus, midbrain and brainstem (see Local FCD section below). Finally, the four resulting lFCD maps (LR/RL; REST1/REST2) were averaged together and averaged images were smoothed at 2mm FWHM.
Local FCD (lFCD) analysis.
The Pearson correlation was used to assess the strength of functional connectivity, Cij, between voxels i and j. A positive correlation threshold of r = 0.2 (sufficient to Bonferroni correct for the number of correlations performed in the subcortical mask, p < 1 × 10−4) was used to compute the binary connectivity coefficients, aij = 1 (if Cij > 0.2) or aij = 0 (if Cij ≤ 0.2). This threshold was lower than previous investigations to have sensitivity to detect effects in subcortical regions that have noisier signals than the neocortex, and hence have weaker observed resting-state correlations. The local FCD (or ‘local degree’) for voxel i was computed as the size of a continuous cluster of voxels with aij = 1, that are connected by surface. A ‘growing’ algorithm was used for time-efficient estimation of lFCD.
Seed-based functional connectivity analysis.
To examine functional connectivity differences with other regions of the brain, we computed seed-based connectivity using the same methods as our previous work (; Supplementary Material).
Statistical analysis.
Second-level statistical analyses were conducted in SPM12 (http://www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm/software/) for imaging data and in Graphpad Prism 7.02 (San Diego, CA) for behavioral data. First, to examine lFCD across the larger population, we conducted a one-sample T-test of lFCD across all 441 participants. Next, to compare CA with the matched control group, we conducted a two-sample T-test of lFCD between groups. These analyses were thresholded at p < .001, uncorrected, with a cluster-level correction of p < .05 family-wise error (FWE) corrected, and a minimum cluster size of k = 100 voxels. To control cluster-level type I error rates, we calculated cluster corrections with the Statistical nonparametric mapping toolbox (SnPM13: http://warwick.ac.uk/snpm; 5000 permutations). Because lFCD has a power law distribution, we also conducted analyses with log-transformed lFCD values; this did not alter the findings, and so we report these data in Supplementary material. We also conducted two-sample T-tests on the volume of subcortical nuclei (from FreeSurfer output), as well as measures of cognition and negative emotionality. To examine if subcortical lFCD had relevance for aberrant cognition and/or negative emotionality in CA, we conducted correlation analysis between lFCD in regions showing significant group differences and in behavioral measures showing significant group differences.