Title.
Effects of naltrexone are influenced by childhood adversity during negative emotional processing in addiction recovery.
Abstract.
Naltrexone is an opioid receptor antagonist used in the management of alcohol dependence. Although the endogenous opioid system has been implicated in emotion regulation, the effects of mu-opioid receptor blockade on brain systems underlying negative emotional processing are not clear in addiction. Individuals meeting criteria for alcohol dependence alone (n=18, alcohol) and in combination with cocaine and/or opioid dependence (n=21, alcohol/drugs) and healthy individuals without a history of alcohol or drug dependence (n=21) were recruited. Participants were alcohol and drug abstinent before entered into this double-blind, placebo-controlled, randomized, crossover study. Functional magnetic resonance imaging was used to investigate brain response while viewing aversive and neutral images relative to baseline on 50 mg of naltrexone and placebo. We found that naltrexone modulated task-related activation in the medial prefrontal cortex and functional connectivity between the anterior cingulate cortex and the hippocampus as a function of childhood adversity (for aversive versus neutral images) in all groups. Furthermore, there was a group-by-treatment-by-condition interaction in the right amygdala, which was mainly driven by a normalization of response for aversive relative to neutral images under naltrexone in the alcohol/drugs group. We conclude that early childhood adversity is one environmental factor that influences pharmacological response to naltrexone. Pharmacotherapy with naltrexone may also have some ameliorative effects on negative emotional processing in combined alcohol and drug dependence, possibly due to alterations in endogenous opioid transmission or the kappa-opioid receptor antagonist actions of naltrexone.
Introduction.
Emotions have a critical role in the development, maintenance and successful treatment of addiction. Suppression of negative affective states such as anxiety and withdrawal symptoms is one motivational pathway to support the consumption of alcohol. As negatively reinforced drinking becomes more pronounced, negative affective states increase, thereby escalating alcohol intake and raising vulnerability to relapse after treatment. Negative reinforcement is driven by activation of stress-induced neurocircuitry in what is widely referred to as the ‘dark side' view of addiction. Negative emotion is thus a key affective process that could be targeted by treatment interventions for addiction.
Functional abnormalities during negative emotional processing have been found in limbic and cortical networks in substance dependence. Threat-related reactivity of the amygdala, for example, is strongly associated with negatively reinforced problem drinking. Connectivity between the amygdala and the hippocampus is associated with maladaptive emotional processing, and alterations in hippocampal network activation and connectivity have been shown to predict relapse. The prefrontal cortex has extensive connections with subcortical structures that regulate emotional processing, including the amygdala. Alcohol and drug exposure impairs emotion regulation in this region, with interconnected medial and cingulate networks showing enhanced reactivity to arousing stimuli and reduced capacity to suppress negative affect. The medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC) and anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) also act to appraise and regulate negative emotions. These cortical areas over-activate in response to substance-related and naturally evocative stimuli and, together with limbic regions associated with impaired emotional processing in addiction, are candidate loci for pharmacological intervention.
Naltrexone is one pharmacotherapy used in the management of alcohol dependence that works by modulating opioid control of dopaminergic cell firing in the ventral tegmental area, thus preventing an increase in dopaminergic activity. The endogenous opioid system has been implicated in emotion regulation. There is some evidence of naltrexone dampening responses to negative emotional stimuli in healthy adults, although this likely reflects stress-reducing effects of the potent kappa-opioid receptor (KOR) antagonist actions of naltrexone. mu-opioid receptor (MOR) antagonism is known to precipitate withdrawal symptoms in humans with current and previous opiate use. MOR antagonism also precipitates aversive consequences of withdrawal from chronic opioid exposure in animals. Naltrexone increases negative emotions in response to stress- and drug-related images in individuals with opioid dependence and increases anxiety in response to drug-related films in individuals with alcohol and cocaine dependence. However, the efficacy of naltrexone treatment has been shown to be associated with greater naltrexone-induced aversion (that is, the more negative the aversive stimulus, the greater the treatment response). This may be due, in part, by activation of the hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal (HPA) axis associated with all substances of abuse potential. Specifically, naltrexone-induced adrenocorticotropic hormone and cortisol levels are thought to reduce craving in individuals with alcohol dependence. Exposure to psychological trauma, another form of aversion, is also known to contribute to individual treatment responses to naltrexone. This is consistent with preclinical evidence showing that early environmental adversity is associated with better treatment effects of naltrexone, suggesting that adversity experienced in early stages of development upregulates endogenous opioid function.
Childhood adversity has long been known to be common in substance use disorders, with at least two-thirds of alcohol- or drug-dependent adults reporting a history of physical, sexual or emotional abuse. Childhood adversity leads to more illicit substance use and increases the risk of dependence in adulthood. Combined alcohol and drug dependence is particularly harmful, as individuals dependent on both consume more units of alcohol and have greater incidence and severity of psychiatric illness than individuals dependent on alcohol alone. The heterogeneity of alcohol use disorders, including concurrent non-alcohol drug use, necessitates development of more tailored treatment approaches. However, patients are typically categorized according to their primary dependency or by the drug for which they seek treatment. Personalized assessment and specialized treatments addressing the effects of combined alcohol and drug-taking behavior are often omitted, thus reducing the potential for more successful recovery.
We used functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to investigate brain response to aversive and neutral images. We sought to determine the effects of naltrexone at standard dose (50 mg) during negative emotional processing between groups dependent on alcohol alone, dependent on alcohol and drugs (both in abstinence) and healthy control volunteers. On the basis of previous research showing altered activation in limbic and cortical networks during negative emotional processing in substance-dependent individuals, including the processing of evocative and negative emotional images, we hypothesized that the dependent groups would show increased activation in the amygdala, the mPFC and the hippocampus in response to aversive images. In light of preclinical evidence, we further hypothesized that these effects would be modulated by naltrexone depending on the degree of childhood adversity experienced.
Materials and methods.
Participants.
This was a double-blind, placebo-controlled, randomized, crossover study involving three sites (Imperial College London, University of Cambridge, University of Manchester; ICCAM). Full details of the ICCAM platform are reported elsewhere. Briefly, inclusion criteria were fluency in English; age 20–64; meeting DSM-IV criteria for alcohol, cocaine, amphetamine or opiate dependence; and abstinence from alcohol or drugs for at least 4 weeks prior to the experimental medicine sessions. Control participants did not meet DSM-IV criteria for any disorder. Exclusion criteria for all participants were use of medication that could not be paused for the study duration; current primary Axis I or neurological diagnosis; current or past psychiatric history (excluding lifetime or secondary history of anxiety or depression); and MRI contraindications. All participants screened negative (using urine samples) for amphetamines, barbiturates, cocaine, opiates, cannabinoids and benzodiazepines.
Here, we compared the effects of naltrexone between individuals who were only dependent on alcohol from individuals who in addition to alcohol were also dependent on cocaine and/or opiates. This distinction was made due to evidence showing that individuals dependent on alcohol and drugs have more severe psychopathology, and differences in brain function and structure compared with individuals dependent on alcohol alone. Control participants with a history of heavy alcohol or drug use were also excluded due to known associated functional and structural abnormalities. Heavy alcohol use was defined as a score higher than eight on the Alcohol Use Disorders Identification Test (AUDIT). Heavy drug use was defined by clinicians of the ICCAM team using the following criteria: more than 300 pills (lifetime) for MDMA; daily/almost daily THC use for more than one year and more than 2 spliffs; and more than once a week for more than six months and more than 1 g for amphetamines. On the basis of these criteria, patients with drug dependence but without alcohol dependence (n=11) and control participants with a history of heavy alcohol or drug use (n=9) were excluded.
The final alcohol group (alcohol) comprised 18 individuals meeting criteria for alcohol dependence only. The alcohol and drugs group (alcohol/drugs) comprised 21 individuals meeting criteria for alcohol dependence and the following drug dependencies: cocaine (42.9%); cocaine and opiates (47.6%); amphetamines (4.8%); and opiates (4.8%). The control group comprised 21 individuals without a history of alcohol or drug dependence.
Baseline assessment.
All participants completed the Wechsler Test of Adult Reading (WTAR) to measure verbal intelligence and control volunteers also completed the AUDIT to screen for harmful drinking patterns. To investigate the effects of individual variations of perceived stress and adverse childhood experiences on emotional processing, participants completed the Perceived Stress Scale (PSS-14) and the Childhood Trauma Questionnaire (CTQ). For the PSS-14, we used the total score and for the CTQ we calculated an abuse composite score from three abuse subscales, that is, physical, sexual and emotional abuse. In light of prior research suggesting the effects of naltrexone might be modulated by variations in locus of control beliefs, participants completed Rotter's locus of control scale and a drug-related version.
Procedure.
This study received ethical approval from the West London and Gene Therapy Advisory Committee National Research Ethics Service committee (11/H0707/9). Participants provided consent, basic demographic information and baseline assessment measures. For the experimental medicine sessions, participants completed a urine screen and alcohol breath and pregnancy tests. Participants screening negative were dosed 2 h prior to the MRI scan. The experimental medicine sessions consisted of administering placebo or 50 mg of naltrexone in a counterbalanced order. The Beck Depression Inventory (BDI-II) and the Spielberger-State Anxiety Inventory (STAI) were administered to evaluate current mood on the day of testing. Smoking was permitted up to 1 h before scanning; caffeine was only permitted in the morning. Participants were given a snack on arrival but subsequent food intake was restricted to ensure full drug absorption. The experimental medicine sessions were separated by at least 1 week.
Evocative images task.
The evocative images task probes negative arousal to aversive stimuli. Aversive images of threat or injury were contrasted with neutral images of human or inanimate objects selected from the International Affective Picture System (IAPS: https://csea.phhp.ufl.edu/media/iapsmessage.html). Any images with alcohol or drugs in them were not included. Similar tasks have been used to demonstrate functional activation in alcohol- and drug-dependent groups in response to negative IAPS images. A total of 240 images (120 aversive, 120 neutral) were presented in a block design consisting of two runs. Each run contained eight blocks of six images presented for 5 s each, followed by a 400 ms inter-stimulus interval that consisted of a fixation cross. Participants were given the implicit task to press a response button when the next image appeared on the screen. Images were counterbalanced for valence and arousal between sessions and between blocks and were presented in a pseudorandomized order, with a neutral image always presented first. Each block was separated by a 15 s rest period to prevent habituation effects. Response latency (in ms) was recorded for each participant in response to all images presented.
Statistical analysis.
Demographic, baseline assessment and behavioral measures.
Demographic and baseline assessment measures were analyzed using univariate analysis of variance (ANOVAs) for continuous variables and chi-square for categorical variables. Post-hoc Tukey tests were used to identify pairwise differences for continuous variables. Mean response latencies during emotional processing were square-root transformed to stabilize variances relative to the mean (untransformed scores presented in Table 1). Repeated-measures ANOVAs were used with the two within-subject factors condition (neutral, aversive) and treatment (placebo, naltrexone) and the between-subject factor group (control, alcohol, alcohol/drugs) to examine response latencies.
Repeated-measures ANOVAs were also used to evaluate changes in affective states between the experimental medicine visits. To determine the influence of naltrexone on task performance, we calculated a change score for each individual by subtracting mean latencies from each condition (aversive minus neutral) following placebo and naltrexone. We then used Pearson's r coefficients to test for associations between change scores and individual variations in affective states.
Neuroimaging data acquisition, processing and analysis.
Volumetric MRI data was acquired with 3 T systems at three sites (Imanova, London; Wolfson Brain Imaging Centre, Cambridge; and the Translational Imaging Unit, Manchester). London and Cambridge operated nominally identical 3 T Siemens Tim Trio systems and Manchester operated a 3 T Philips Achieva.
fMRI data were preprocessed using SPM8. Mean echo-planar imaging (EPI) was first computed for each participant and visually inspected in the orbitofrontal cortex and temporal lobe to ensure that none showed excessive signal dropout. All EPIs were then realigned to the first scan by rigid body transformations to correct for head movements. Next, EPIs were normalized to the standard template in the Montreal Neurological Institute (MNI) space using linear and nonlinear transformations and smoothed with a Gaussian kernel of full width at half maximum of 8 mm. Realignment parameters were then inspected for each subject to make sure that movements of translation and rotation were <2 mm and 2°, respectively.
To identify significant differences across groups in regional responses of brain areas, a general linear model (GLM) was employed. Subject-specific GLMs included three experimental factors (aversive images, neutral images and fixation cross) and six realignment parameters as effects of no interest to account for residual motion-related variance. Low-frequency signal drift was removed using a high-pass filter (cut-off 128 s). An autoregressive modeling of temporal autocorrelations was applied. The following contrasts were generated for the second-level analysis: (1) aversive images versus neutral images, (2) aversive images versus fixation cross and (3) neutral images versus fixation cross.
Group differences in brain responses were assessed via: (1) a full factorial analysis for the contrast ‘aversive versus neutral' including three groups (control, alcohol, alcohol/drugs) and two pharmacological treatments (placebo, naltrexone) as main factors and (2) a full factorial analysis including three groups (control, alcohol, alcohol/drugs), two pharmacological treatments (placebo, naltrexone) and two task conditions (aversive images versus fixation cross, neutral images versus fixation cross) as main factors. For each model, SPM-F-maps assessing the main effect of group, the main effect of treatment, the group-by-treatment interaction and the group-by-treatment-by-condition interaction were generated, respectively. An additional covariate of site was added to remove the effect of the different scan sites. In the first model, we also included the abuse composite score as a covariate-of-interest to test for associations between brain response and childhood adversity as a function of pharmacological treatment.
To threshold the second-level maps, we used a priori regions of interest (ROIs) based on a functional definition of the brain regions as previously recommended (P<0.05, family-wise error (FWE) correction for multiple comparisons after a small volume correction). This commonly employed statistical procedure not only ensures a robust protection against type I errors but also prevents false negative results.
Here, the following anatomical ROIs were selected because of their functional role in negative emotional processing in substance use disorders: the amygdala, the mPFC and the hippocampus. Each ROI was defined using a sphere centered on MNI coordinates obtained from previous studies. Specifically, a sphere with a radius of 5 mm was centered on the right amygdala (x,y,z: 25,−3,−27), a sphere with a radius of 10 mm was centered on the right mPFC (x,y,z: 14,62,1) and a sphere with a radius of 8 mm was centered on the right hippocampus (x,y,z: 29,−14,−14). The different size of the spheres was chosen to reflect the actual size of the regions. Brain regions that were not predicted a priori but met a threshold of P<0.05, whole-brain corrected, were also reported.
Functional connectivity: psycho-physiological interaction analyses.
Psycho-physiological interaction (PPI) represents the change in connectivity between a seed region and the rest of the brain that is induced by a specific psychological context. The ACC was chosen as a seed due to the high density of MORs in this region that potentially reflects higher binding potential associated with greater capacity to modulate negative emotional processing. We sought to identify brain regions that had a differential functional connectivity pattern with the seed region during the processing of aversive versus neutral images. For each participant, a 15 mm sphere was centered on the right anterior cingulate cortex (x,y,z: 6,60,4; extracted from the first model). The time series of the BOLD response for each participant was then computed using the first eigenvariate from all voxels' time series in the sphere.
The BOLD time series for each individual was deconvolved to estimate a neuronal time series for the source, using the PPIs deconvolution parameter defaults in SPM8. The PPI regressor was calculated as the element-by-element product of the seed neuronal time series and a vector coding for the main effect of task (1 for aversive images, −1 for neutral images). This product was reconvolved by the canonical haemodynamic response function. The statistical model also included the main effect of the task convolved by the haemodynamic response function, the seed neuronal time series and the six movement parameters as effects of no interest.
Subject-specific PPI models were run, and contrast images were generated such that the identified target regions were those that showed a change in connectivity with the ACC during the processing of aversive versus neutral images. Subject-specific PPI contrast images were entered into second-level GLMs to assess if change in connectivity between the ACC and other regions in the brain were associated with childhood adversity as a function of pharmacological treatment. The same statistical approaches previously described were employed to threshold the second-level PPI maps.