Title.
fMRI study of neural sensitization to hedonic stimuli in long‐term, daily cannabis users.
Abstract.
Abstract.
Although there is emergent evidence illustrating neural sensitivity to cannabis cues in cannabis users, the specificity of this effect to cannabis cues as opposed to a generalized hyper‐sensitivity to hedonic stimuli has not yet been directly tested. Using fMRI, we presented 53 daily, long‐term cannabis users and 68 non‐using controls visual and tactile cues for cannabis, a natural reward, and, a sensory‐perceptual control object to evaluate brain response to hedonic stimuli in cannabis users. The results showed an interaction between group and reward type such that the users had greater response during cannabis cues relative to natural reward cues (i.e., fruit) in the orbitofrontal cortex, striatum, anterior cingulate gyrus, and ventral tegmental area compared to non‐users (cluster‐threshold z = 2.3, P < 0.05). In the users, there were positive brain‐behavior correlations between neural response to cannabis cues in fronto‐striatal‐temporal regions and subjective craving, marijuana‐related problems, withdrawal symptoms, and levels of THC metabolites (cluster‐threshold z = 2.3, P < 0.05). These findings demonstrate hyper‐responsivity, and, specificity of brain response to cannabis cues in long‐term cannabis users that are above that of response to natural reward cues. These observations are concordant with incentive sensitization models suggesting sensitization of mesocorticolimbic regions and disruption of natural reward processes following drug use. Although the cross‐sectional nature of this study does not provide information on causality, the positive correlations between neural response and indicators of cannabis use (i.e., THC levels) suggest that alterations in the reward system are, in part, related to cannabis use. Hum Brain Mapp 37:3431–3443, 2016. © 2016 The Authors Human Brain Mapping Published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
INTRODUCTION.
The public health relevance of cannabis use is rising with the changes in legislation in the United States, yet the literature on the transition to problematic use remains unresolved. One of the central components that underlie problematic use is craving. Although only a handful of published studies have investigated the neural mechanisms underlying craving for cannabis, findings of greater neural response in mesocorticolimbic areas during exposure to cannabis cues have been consistent across different populations of cannabis users [Cousijn et al., 2013a]; [Charboneau, et al., 2013]; [Filbey et al., 2009a]; [Goldman et al., 2013; Lundahl and Johanson, 2011]. This neural response has been related to symptoms of cannabis use disorder (CUD), although, a direct link to the subjective experience of craving has not yet been reported [Cousijn et al., 2013a; Filbey et al., 2009a; Goldman et al., 2013; Lundahl and Johanson, 2011]. Nevertheless, existing studies corroborate the link between greater mesocorticolimbic brain response during exposure to cannabis cues that is related to CUD, suggesting increased motivational processing associated with drug‐seeking behavior in CUDs. Increased motivational processing to other salient stimuli, such as monetary reward, has also been found in cannabis users [Cousijn et al., 2013b; Filbey et al., 2013; Nestor et al., 2010; Yip et al., 2014; van Hell et al., 2010]. However, because money may be associated with cannabis and could be a secondary cue for cannabis, the specificity of increased motivational processing to cannabis rather than a generalized hyper‐responsivity to all rewards has yet to be directly examined. A study by Wetherill et al. [2014] comparing neural response to subliminal cannabis cues with subliminal sexual images found greater response to the subliminally presented cannabis cues relative to the sexual images in the insula, ventral striatum, and amygdala [Wetherill et al., 2014]. It is, therefore, possible that similarly greater response to explicitly presented cannabis cues relative to appetitive cues would be expected.
In this study, to determine how cannabis use relates to potential disruptions in the brain's natural reward processes, we tested the specificity of neural response to cannabis cues relative to natural rewards in long‐term, heavy cannabis users, and non‐using controls. Based on incentive sensitization models of addiction that propose that drugs sensitize mesocorticolimbic regions and disrupt or segment natural reward processes [Hyman and Malenka, 2001; Robinson and Berridge, 2000] as well as from findings by Wetherill et al [2014], we hypothesized that cannabis users will show greater fMRI BOLD response when exposed to explicitly presented cannabis cues that will be above and beyond response (1) to cues for natural rewards and (2) in non‐users. Greater activation is expected in mesocorticolimbic regions that regulate motivation, executive function, and reward processing. Lastly, given the existing literature showing associations between the brain's response to cues and cannabis use behaviors, we also expected that this pattern of neural activation would be related to subjective craving as well as behavioral measures of cannabis use.
MATERIALS AND METHODS.
This study was approved by the University of Texas at Dallas and University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center Institutional Review Boards. This study was conducted according to the principles expressed in the Declaration of Helsinki. All participants provided informed written consent to participate in the study and were provided monetary compensation for their participation.
Participants.
Fifty nine regular cannabis users and 70 non‐users participated in this study. The study's inclusion criteria were: right‐handedness, English as the primary language, absence of current or history of psychosis, traumatic brain injury, and MRI contraindications (e.g., pregnancy, non‐removal metallic implants, claustrophobia). All of the participants were screened via urinalysis for other drugs of abuse and were excluded if drugs (other than cannabis) were detected. Participants were excluded for regular tobacco use as defined by smoking more than a pack of cigarettes a month as well as current alcohol dependence based on the Structured Clinical Interview for DSM‐IV (SCID) [First et al., 1997]. Cannabis users were recruited based on self‐reported history of regular cannabis use with a minimum of 5,000 lifetime occasions, as well as daily use over the preceding 60 days. Verification of cannabis use was conducted via quantification of THC metabolites as ng/ml (over creatinine) via gas chromatography (GC)/mass spectroscopy (MS). The non‐using controls were recruited based on the absence of daily cannabis use at any period in their lifetime, in addition to no current illicit drug use in the past 60 days.
Behavioral Data.
We collected (1) the Marijuana Craving Questionnaire (MCQ) [Heishman et al., 2001] to measure basal level craving for cannabis immediately prior to and after the MRI scan and, (2) the Marijuana Withdrawal Checklist, (MWC) [Budney et al., 1999] to measure self‐reported withdrawal symptoms immediately prior to the MRI scan, and, (3) the Marijuana Problems Survey (MPS) [Stephens et al., 2000] to measure problems associated with cannabis use. Information pertaining to self‐reported grams of cannabis use per day was also obtained from the cannabis users.
Behavioral Data Analyses.
T‐tests and chi‐square tests were used in SPSS 21 for descriptive purposes as well as to compare the groups on demographic and substance use variables (Table 1).
fMRI Data.
fMRI scan acquisition.
The users were scanned following a 72‐h abstinence from cannabis use. Although there is no reliable measure of acute abstinence from cannabis, we measured THC metabolites as ng/ml (over creatinine) (via GC/MS) from the participants before and after approximately 72‐h period to detect reductions in THC metabolites, in addition to self‐report. All participants were asked to abstain from alcohol for 24 h and from caffeine and cigarettes for the 2‐h before their scheduled scan. Breath alcohol level was also collected to confirm blood alcohol content of 0.000 at the beginning of the scan. Additionally, all participants were asked to eat a meal before their scan appointment to reduce confounding effects of hunger.
Scanning sessions took place in the Advanced Imaging Research Center (AIRC) on the main University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center (UTSW) campus. MRI images were collected using a 3T Philips whole body scanner equipped with Quasar gradient subsystem (40 mT/m amplitude, a slew rate of 220 mT/m/ms). Structural MRI scans were collected with a MPRAGE sequence with the following parameters: TR/TE/TI = 8.2/3.70/1,100 ms, flip angle = 12°, FOV = 256 × 256 mm, slab thickness = 160 mm (along left‐right direction), voxel size =1 × 1 × 1 mm, total scan time = 3 min 57 s. fMRI scans were collected using a gradient echo, echo‐planar sequence with the intercomissural line (AC‐PC) as a reference (TR: 2.0 s, TE: 29 ms, flip angle: 75°, matrix size: 64 × 64, 39 slices, voxel size: 3.44 × 3.44 × 3.5 mm3).
fMRI cannabis cue exposure task.
During the fMRI session, the participants completed a cannabis cue‐exposure task modified from the one previously described by Filbey et al. [2009b] to include a cue for a natural reward. The task consisted of two runs, each one with a different pseudorandom order of visual and tactile presentations of: (i) a single cannabis cue (six trials), (ii) a single natural reward cue (six trials), and (iii) a single neutral cue (six trials). Each cue was presented for twentys. Following the cue exposure period, we measured momentary subjective craving by asking the participants to respond to: “Please rate your urge to use marijuana right now.” Responses were measured using a scale from zero (no urge at all) to ten (extremely high urge) (five s). A twenty s washout period completed each trial. Responses were recorded using a fiber‐optic pad. The participants were pseudorandomly given different orders of the runs (e.g., run A, run B or run B, run A).
We presented task stimuli to the participants based on their response to “what is your preferred cannabis use method?” Twenty‐three users selected the pipe, eleven selected the bong, eleven selected the blunt and eight selected the joint. For the non‐users, cannabis paraphernalia were matched to what was presented to the users resulting in Twenty‐seven non‐users presented with the pipe, Twenty‐two presented with the bong, three presented with the blunt and eleven presented with the joint. There was missing information on five of the participants.
For the natural reward cues, we selected fruit because of its appetitiveness and because it exists within the natural environment and would have inherent representations in the human brain [Filbey et al., 2012; Jiang et al., 2015]. Similar to the cannabis cues, we presented participants with their self‐selected fruit stimulus based on the their response to “what is your preferred fruit?” In the users, fourteen chose a banana, twelve chose an apple, thirteen chose an orange, and thirteen chose grapes. In the non‐users, sixteen selected a banana, seventeen selected an apple, fifteen selected an orange, and twenty selected grapes. Lastly, similar to the original task, a pencil was used as a neutral cue for all of the participants.
Stimulus presentations were delivered using E‐Prime (Psychology Software Tools). The timing of the stimulus presentation was synchronized with trigger pulses from the magnet to ensure precise temporal integration of stimulus presentation and fMRI data acquisition.
fMRI Data Analysis.
Pre‐processing.
The functional imaging time series was pre‐processed using SPM8 (Wellcome Department of Imaging Neuroscience, London, UK). Before starting analyses, the first seven volumes of each EPI run were discarded to allow the MR signal to reach steady state. Pre‐processing of these volumes started with motion correction using SPM's realignment module [Friston et al., 1995]. This was followed by slice timing correction, which corrected for temporal differences in acquisition time of the BOLD signal across slices within each volume. The resultant time series was then smoothed using a 6 mm full width half maximum (FWHM) Gaussian kernel.
First‐level analyses.
Preprocessed time series for each participant were analyzed using multiple linear regression as implemented in FILM (FMRIB's Improved Linear Model), a component of FSL. Regressors for the linear model were generated using FEAT by convolving the cue states (Cue Present, Craving Rating, Cue Washout) of each cue type (cannabis cues, neutral object cues and fruit cues) with a double gamma hemodynamic response function. Parameter estimates for the regressors were used to generate z‐maps based on three contrasts of interest: Cue ON cannabis versus Cue ON neutral object; Cue ON cannabis versus Cue ON fruit; and Cue ON fruit versus Cue ON neutral object.
Group level analyses.
Participant contrast maps were registered to their own MRI T1 weighted MPRAGE structural images, and then co‐registered to the MNI 152 template space using FLIRT (FMRIB's Linear Image Registration Tool). Group analysis of contrasts was performed in FEAT using FLAME (FMRIB's Local Analysis of Mixed Effects) to estimate a mixed effects model of task‐related activation differences for each of the three contrasts of interest (as a Gaussianized t/F statistic). Groups were defined by cannabis usage status (user/non‐user). Contrast maps were generated for each usage status. Resulting maps were height‐thresholded at a Z‐value of 2.3. We used FEAT's cluster‐thresholding method, which estimated activated clusters’ significance level (from Gaussian random field theory) compared with the cluster probability threshold [Worsley et al., 1996]) of P ≤ 0.05. Because a height‐threshold of z = 2.3 may result in large clusters despite adequately controlling for false‐positives, we also used a cluster defining voxel threshold of P ≤ 0.001 per recommendations by Woo et al. [2014] for the enhancement of anatomical specificity.
In addition to simple group level maps, within the cannabis users, group level contrasts were generated for several variables of interest. To determine the relationship between the neural response in brain areas and subjective craving, group maps were regressed separately against total MCQ scores (baseline craving) and in‐scanner cannabis craving ratings. To determine if the neural response in brain areas are modulated by cannabis use behavior, group maps were regressed separately against reported grams of cannabis use per day and THC/creatinine levels from the abstinent state. To determine the clinical relevance of the neural response to cannabis cues, group maps were regressed separately against MWC scores and MPS scores. We expected positive associations between neural response to cues and subjective craving, cannabis use behavior and clinical symptoms of CUD.