Title.
Adversity in childhood linked to elevated striatal dopamine function in adulthood.
Abstract.
Childhood adversity increases the risk of psychosis in adulthood. Theoretical and animal models suggest that this effect may be mediated by increased striatal dopamine neurotransmission. The primary objective of this study was to examine the relationship between adversity in childhood and striatal dopamine function in early adulthood. Secondary objectives were to compare exposure to childhood adversity and striatal dopamine function in young people at ultra high risk (UHR) of psychosis and healthy volunteers. Sixty-seven young adults, comprising 47 individuals at UHR for psychosis and 20 healthy volunteers were recruited from the same geographic area and were matched for age, gender and substance use. Presynaptic dopamine function in the associative striatum was assessed using 18F-DOPA positron emission tomography. Childhood adversity was assessed using the Childhood Experience of Care and Abuse questionnaire. Within the sample as a whole, both severe physical or sexual abuse (T63 = 2.92; P = 0.005), and unstable family arrangements (T57 = 2.80; P = 0.007) in childhood were associated with elevated dopamine function in the associative striatum in adulthood. Comparison of the UHR and volunteer subgroups revealed similar incidence of childhood adverse experiences, and there was no significant group difference in dopamine function. This study provides evidence that childhood adversity is linked to elevated striatal dopamine function in adulthood.
Introduction.
Traumatic experiences during childhood, such as physical, sexual or psychological abuse, increase the risk of mental illness in adulthood threefold. The neurobiological basis of this effect is unknown. However, exposure to sustained environmental stress elevates central dopaminergic neurotransmission in animal models, and an elevation in brain dopamine function is one of the most robust neurobiological features of psychosis. It has thus been suggested that psychosocial stress in childhood may increase the risk of psychosis in later life through an effect on dopaminergic neurotransmission.
There is indirect evidence to support this notion from human neuroimaging studies. Healthy volunteers who have experienced childhood trauma show an elevated dopaminergic response to amphetamine administration, which may be mediated by perceived stress. In addition, striatal dopamine release elicited by an acute psychosocial stress task is elevated in healthy college students who experienced low levels of maternal care during childhood, suggesting that childhood disadvantage may be associated with elevated dopaminergic responses to stress in later life. Compared to healthy volunteers, an elevated dopaminergic response to this stress task is also seen in adults who are at high risk for psychosis, adults with schizotypy, and patients with schizophrenia.
The social defeat hypothesis posits that repeated setbacks in social situations leads to a sensitization of mesostriatal dopamine neurotransmission, and thereby increases the risk of developing psychotic symptoms. Childhood trauma may represent one particular type of social defeat. In support of the social defeat hypothesis, it has recently been reported that amphetamine-stimulated dopamine release in the striatum is elevated in young adults with severe hearing impairment, who generally experience marked social exclusion.
The aim of the present study was to further examine how exposure to adversity in childhood impacts on striatal dopamine function in adulthood, in both a healthy volunteer group, and also a group at who are at ultra high risk (UHR) of developing psychosis. Both the level of striatal dopamine function and the incidence of childhood adversity tend to be higher in UHR groups, although to a lesser extent than in schizophrenia. The primary hypothesis was that striatal presynaptic dopamine function would be elevated in both UHR and healthy volunteers who experienced childhood adversity. As previous studies have shown elevated dopamine responses in healthy volunteers who experienced childhood adversity, we predicted that this relationship would be seen across both groups, but to a greater degree in the UHR sample. Related to this, the secondary hypotheses were that exposure to childhood adversity would be higher in the UHR than healthy volunteer group, and that striatal presynaptic dopamine function would be elevated in the UHR compared to the healthy volunteer group. A further hypothesis was that both striatal presynaptic dopamine and childhood adversity would be positively related to the severity of psychotic symptoms.
Participants and methods.
Participants.
This study had National Health Service Research Ethics Committee and Administration of Radioactive Substances Advisory Committee approval. All participants provided their written informed consent. One group consisted of 47 individuals who met operationalized UHR criteria (over the last year, experience of attenuated psychotic symptoms, or psychotic symptoms that lasted less than a week and spontaneously remitted, or schizotypal personality disorder or a first degree relative with a psychotic disorder plus a decline in functioning) recruited from Outreach and Support in South London (OASIS), part of the South London and Maudsley National Health Service Trust. A second group comprised 20 healthy volunteers (Control), recruited from the same geographic area by public advertisement. They had no personal or family history of psychiatric symptoms, and were not taking psychotropic medication. Both groups included subjects who had participated in previous dopamine imaging studies, and represent those participants in whom there was existing cross-over with a separate study on childhood adversity, or those whom could be re-contacted to complete the childhood adversity questionnaire.
Assessment of clinical variables and childhood adversity.
Psychopathology was assessed using the Comprehensive Assessment of At-Risk Mental States (CAARMS), Positive and Negative Syndrome Scale for Schizophrenia (PANSS), and the Hamilton Depression and Anxiety Rating Scales.
Childhood adversity was assessed using the Childhood Experience of Care and Abuse Questionnaire (CECA-Q). Participants did not have to answer any questions they were uncomfortable with. The following adverse events were analysed: A) death or separation from either parental figure; B) severe sexual or physical abuse; C) maternal or paternal antipathy or neglect; D) more than two family arrangements (the number of different caregivers with each of whom the child lived for at least one year). Each was rated as either present (exposure) or absent (no exposure). As only four participants reported being brought up in a children's home or institution, this event was excluded from the analysis.
18F-DOPA PET imaging.
All subjects were studied using 18F-DOPA positron emission tomography (PET) imaging. Data were acquired on either a CTI/Siemens ECAT HR + 962 tomograph (11 healthy volunteers; 28 UHR) or a CTI/Siemens ECAT HR ++ 966 tomograph (9 healthy volunteers; 19 UHR) (Siemens Molecular Imaging, Knoxville, TN, U.S.A.) as previously described. Study participants were asked to fast for 12 h before imaging. Urine drug screens on the morning of the scan to confirmed absence of illicit substance use. All subjects received carbidopa (150 mg) and entacapone (400 mg) orally 1 h before imaging to reduce the formation of radiolabeled 18F-DOPA metabolites. All data were acquired in three-dimensional mode. A 10-minute (ECAT HR + 962) or 5-minute (ECAT HR + 966) transmission scan was performed before radiotracer injection to correct for attenuation and scatter. Thirty seconds after the start of PET image acquisition, 180 Mbq (ECAT HR + 962) or 150 MBq (ECAT HR + 966) 18F-DOPA (± 10%) was administered by bolus intravenous injection. On both scanners, emission data were acquired in list mode for 95 min, and rebinned into 26 time frames.
Data were reconstructed using the 3D reprojection algorithms. Head movement was corrected for by realigning denoised, nonattenuation-corrected dynamic images and applying the transformation parameters to the corresponding attenuation-corrected frames to create a movement-corrected dynamic image for analysis. Standardized striatal volumes of interest (VOI) were delineated bilaterally on a single subject T1 magnetic resonance image in Montreal Neurologic Institute (MNI) space. These VOI included the limbic (ventral), associative and sensorimotor subdivisions of the striatum, as according to previously defined anatomical criteria. The cerebellar reference region was defined using a probabilistic atlas. An 18F-DOPA template, also in MNI space, was then normalized together with the VOI map to each individual PET summation image using SPM5 (http://fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm; Wellcome Department of Imaging Neuroscience, University College London). Graphical analysis, adapted for a reference tissue input function as used to estimate presynaptic dopamine synthesis capacity by calculating the rate of utilization of the dopamine precursor 18F-DOPA in the bilateral striatum, relative to the cerebellar reference tissue (kicer min− 1). To control for effects of scanner model, individual subject kicer values were converted to z-scores (z = (kicer – scanner mean kicer)/scanner standard deviation (SD)) for all analyses.
Statistical analyses.
Statistical analysis was performed in SPSS version 19.0 (IBM Corporation, Armonk, New York). For demographic, clinical variables and measures of childhood adversity, comparisons between Control and UHR groups were performed using Fisher's Exact, Mann-Whitney U or unpaired t-tests. The threshold for statistical significance of P < 0.05. The same approach was used to compare demographic and clinical variables in individuals exposed or not exposed to each type of childhood adversity. The impact of exposures to childhood adversity on striatal dopamine function were determined using independent samples t-tests (exposure versus non-exposure). Effect size was calculated as Cohen's d. Secondary analysis employed univariate ANOVA to explore potential influences of group (Control versus UHR) and substance use on the relationships between exposures to childhood adversity and dopamine function. After confirming normality of distribution, relationships between the severity of total prodromal symptoms (total CAARMS score) in the UHR group and striatal dopamine function (z-score) were explored Pearson's correlation coefficient.