Title.
Impact of schizophrenia on anterior and posterior hippocampus during memory for complex scenes.
Abstract.
Objectives.
Hippocampal dysfunction has been proposed as a mechanism for memory deficits in schizophrenia. Available evidence suggests that the anterior and posterior hippocampus could be differentially affected. Accordingly, we used fMRI to test the hypothesis that activity in posterior hippocampus is disproportionately reduced in schizophrenia, particularly during spatial memory retrieval.
Methods.
26 healthy participants and 24 patients with schizophrenia from the UC Davis Early Psychosis Program were studied while fMRI was acquired on a 3 Tesla Siemens scanner. During encoding, participants were oriented to critical items through questions about item features (e.g., “Does the lamp have a square shade?”) or spatial location (e.g., “Is the lamp on the table next to the couch?”). At test, participants determined whether scenes were changed or unchanged. fMRI analyses contrasted activation in a priori regions of interest (ROI) in anterior and posterior hippocampus during correct recognition of item changes and spatial changes.
Results.
As predicted, patients with schizophrenia exhibited reduced activation in the posterior hippocampus during detection of spatial changes but not during detection of item changes. Unexpectedly, patients exhibited increased activation of anterior hippocampus during detection of item changes. Whole brain analyses revealed reduced fronto-parietal and striatal activation in patients for spatial but not for item change trials.
Conclusions.
Results suggest a gradient of hippocampal dysfunction in which posterior hippocampus – which is necessary for processing fine-grained spatial relationships – is underactive, and anterior hippocampus – which may process context more globally - is overactive.
Highlights.
Patients with schizophrenia show impaired memory for spatial relationships amongst objects in scenes.
Patients have less posterior hippocampal activation during spatial memory and more anterior hippocampal activation during item memory.
This gradient of hippocampal dysfunction in schizophrenia, suggests that it should not be examined as a unitary structure in future studies.
Introduction.
Episodic memory impairment is a core symptom of psychotic disorders such as schizophrenia, and this deficit is likely related to impaired hippocampal function. Basic behavioral and cognitive neuroscience research reveals important functional differences across the longitudinal extent of the anterior and posterior hippocampus. However, it is unclear whether the anterior and posterior hippocampus is differentially affected in schizophrenia.
Research in rodents demonstrates that the dorsal (corresponding to posterior in humans) and ventral hippocampus (corresponding to anterior in humans) differ in terms of anatomical connectivity and gene expression. Furthermore, lesions to the dorsal hippocampus in rats impair performance on spatial memory tasks, whereas ventral hippocampal lesions often have no effect on spatial learning. Studies of place cells in rats complement lesion findings by suggesting that place cells in dorsal hippocampus exhibit specific place fields, whereas place cells in ventral hippocampus are often large, sometimes extending across an entire spatial context.
Dissociations between anterior and posterior hippocampal functions have also been observed in humans with fMRI. Functional dissociations between anterior and posterior hippocampus have been attributed to processing of; novel versus repeated stimuli, emotional versus non-emotional material and encoding versus retrieval. Work has also linked posterior hippocampus to retrieving memories based on spatial context information, and anterior hippocampus to more global and less context-dependent relational memory processes. Moreover, when processing spatial information, a distinction exists between retrieval of fine-grained spatial details (posterior hippocampus) versus more global gist-like information (anterior hippocampus). This has contributed to a “granularity gradient” model in which the head of the hippocampus retrieves course, large-scale representations; the hippocampal body retrieves medium sized spatial representations; and the tail of the hippocampus retrieves fine-grained local representations. Based on this granularity model, we predict that manipulation of spatial locations during the current memory task will produce maximal activation in the posterior hippocampus, whereas the anterior hippocampus will be most sensitive to global changes in item identity.
This distinction between anterior and posterior hippocampal function has received minimal attention in the schizophrenia literature. The most consistent story comes from resting-state studies supporting a model of tonic hyperactivity of the anterior hippocampus in patients versus healthy controls According to this view, increased activity of the ventral/anterior hippocampus leads to disinhibition of the ventral tegmental area, and this, in turn, contributes to increased dopaminergic activity and disordered cognition in schizophrenia. Consistent with this idea, a series of resting-state studies of cerebral blood volume (CBV), found that CBV was increased in patients relative to healthy controls specifically within the CA1 region of the anterior hippocampus [for review, see ]. It is unclear how this tonic hyperactivity would relate to specific episodic memory functions, although an early study suggested that a hyperactive baseline state could help explain the reduced responsivity of the hippocampus to memory demands.
With one exception, fMRI studies of episodic memory in schizophrenia have not systematically examined anterior versus posterior hippocampus. In an attempt to detect a consistent anterior/posterior pattern of group differences we performed a qualitative review and found roughly an equal number of studies that; 1) employed tasks that failed to engage the hippocampus or detect group differences in either anterior or posterior hippocampus, 2) utilized designs that were successful in detecting reduced activation in patients, relative to healthy controls, in the anterior hippocampus, or 3) utilized tasks that revealed evidence of reduced patient activation in the posterior hippocampus during episodic retrieval. The one study that directly contrasted anterior and posterior hippocampus found that anterior hippocampal activity increased during novelty detection in healthy controls, and was reduced in unmedicated but not in medicated people with schizophrenia.
Based on findings indicating potentially different effects on anterior and posterior hippocampus, the goal of the current study was to test the hypothesis that patients with schizophrenia are specifically impaired at activating the posterior hippocampus during episodic retrieval. Participants were scanned while performing a memory paradigm that required detection of subtle changes to items or spatial configurations in complex visual scenes. In a previous eye-tracking study using a variant of the current task, we found that patients with schizophrenia spent less time viewing the portion of a scene that involved a spatial change in item location, but showed a normal increase in viewing when there was change in item identity, suggesting a disproportionate eye-movement memory deficit for spatial information. Based on findings indicating posterior hippocampal specialization for fine-grained spatial relationships and spatial context, we hypothesized that patients with schizophrenia would show relative reductions in posterior, but not anterior hippocampal activation during processing of spatial changes.
Methods and materials.
Participants.
Data were acquired on 30 patients with schizophrenia and 30 healthy controls. Data were excluded for excessive relative frame-to-frame movement (i.e., > 0.4 mm, exceeding 3 standard deviations from the mean) in 1 control and 1 patient; for below chance performance in 1 control and 2 patients; for 1 control and 2 patients who stopped participation; for 1 control with an incidental abnormal anatomical finding; and for 1 patient with a technical malfunction (faulty button box), leaving a final sample of 24 patients with schizophrenia and 26 controls. Groups were matched for age, gender, handedness and parental education (Table 1). Participant education was lower in patients. All patients were receiving medication (2 typical, 22 atypical), and clinically stable. Patients were early in their illness [Duration (mean ± standard deviation) = 3.02 ± 2.51 years], and overall symptom severity (BPRS total) was in the mild range (42.7 ± 13.3). Data collection began after participants provided written informed consent following Institutional Review Board approval.
Materials.
Stimuli included 128 rendered scenes created using Punch! Home Design software (Encore, Inc., El Segundo, CA). Three scene variants were created – the original, a version containing an item manipulation, and a version containing a spatial manipulation – producing a total of 384 scenes. One item embedded in each original scene was designated the critical item and, in manipulated versions, this item was either replaced with a different exemplar (item change) or displaced and moved to a new location (spatial change). Critical items were presented in the context of just one scene, and moved equally often from left (in the original scene) to right (in the changed scene) as right to left when the change was spatial.
During encoding (Fig. 1a), participants were presented with orienting questions, directing their attention to the critical item, and were asked either about item features (e.g., “Does the lamp have a square shade?”) or spatial location (e.g., “Is the lamp on the table next to the couch?”). These questions ensured that participants attended to and encoded critical items that might subsequently change during the test phase. The experiment was designed so that the type of change at test (item or spatial) was always consistent with processing required by the initial orienting question.
Methods.
After informed consent, each participant successfully completed a practice session before being situated in the fMRI scanner with head pads to minimize motion. Scanning consisted of four interleaved encoding and test runs.
Each encoding run consisted of 24 trials. Trials initiated with scene presentation, which remained in view for 6 s. Orienting questions were played via noise cancelling headphones, and participants were instructed to make “yes” or “no” button presses, and attempt to commit each picture to memory. Trials were separated by a variable duration inter-trial interval (ITI: 2–18 s), with a 1 s central fixation cross occurring during this ITI prior to onset of the next scene. Timing was optimized using Optseq (http://surfer.nmr.mgh.harvard.edu/optseq/). Each encoding run lasted 278 s and, across four runs, participants encoded 96 trial-unique pictures.
Each test run consisted of 32 trials. Presented scenes were either new and had not been seen during encoding (novel condition: 8 trials), or had been studied previously (24 trials), and were counterbalanced across conditions. Studied scenes were either unchanged (8 trials), contained a new item (item change: 8 trials), or contained a change in item location (spatial change: 8 trials). Each trial began with presentation of a scene for 6 s, and event timing was identical to encoding. Participants were instructed to indicate as quickly and accurately as possible whether each scene was new (i.e. had not been seen in the corresponding encoding run), unchanged (i.e. seen before and completely unchanged), or changed (i.e. seen before, but now contained an item or a spatial change). A variable duration ITI (2–18 s) culminated with a cross hair to encourage central fixation and alert participants to the next scene (see Fig. 1). Test runs lasted 366 s and, across four runs, participants completed 128 test trials. Eye movements were also recorded during the test phase to examine eye movement memory effects. However, because of technical difficulties, eye movement data were available for only a subset of participants. Although the pattern of results paralleled earlier findings, because of the limited sample size, and because they are not a focus of the current investigation, eye tracking methods and results are summarized in Supplementary Materials.
fMRI acquisition.
Data were obtained at the UC Davis Imaging Research Center on a 3-T Siemens Tim Trio scanner (Erlangen, Germany) with a Siemens 8 channel phased array coil. After acquiring a rapid 3-plane localizer, trans-axial T2 weighted images were acquired with spatial resolution of 0.4 × 0.4 × 4.0 mm. A reference field-map image with spatial resolution of 3.4 × 3.4 × 4.0 mm was used for motion and distortion correction. Functional images were acquired with blood oxygenation level dependent imaging (BOLD) using a 34-slice whole-brain, single-shot gradient-echo echo-planar sequence (TR 2000 ms, TE 27 ms, flip angle 90°, FOV 220 × 220 mm, slice thickness 4.0 mm, no gap). Structural T1-weighted images were acquired using an MPRAGE sequence (TR = 2000 ms, TE ~ 3.0 ms, FA = 8°, FOV = 256 × 240 mm, matrix: 256 × 256, voxel size: 1 mm isotropic, 208 sagittal slices).
fMRI processing.
Pre-processing was accomplished with FMRI Expert Analysis Tool (FEAT) in the FMRIB Software Library (FSL version 4.1; www.fmrib.ox.ac.uk/fsl) using standard procedures, including fieldmap correction. Statistical analysis was performed using a general linear model (GLM) implemented in FEAT (FSL version 4.1). Test phase activity associated with responses for each scene type (unchanged, novel, item change, spatial change) was modeled for each 6 s presentation epoch by convolving a vector of expected neural activity with the 3 basis-function set of FMRIB's Linear Optimal Basis Sets (FLOBS), which adjusts the canonical hemodynamic response function to account for delay and dispersion in order to improve GLM fit. Although both correct and incorrect responses were modeled, only correct responses were examined at the group level. Temporal autocorrelation due to low frequency (“1/f”) noise was accounted for by pre-whitening (FSL's FILM). The 4 test runs were combined in a 2nd level fixed-effect analysis for each subject. These parameter estimates were used in a 3rd level mixed-effects analysis to derive group-level maps that separately contrasted item and spatial change trials with unchanged trials for all subjects (FSL's FLAME). Because relative motion (mean ± standard deviation, in mm) was greater in patients with schizophrenia (0.11 ± 0.06 mm) than in healthy controls (0.07 ± 0.03 mm; t(48) = − 2.92, p < 0.01), relative motion was included as a covariate of no-interest.
To test hypotheses about the effects of memory for item versus spatial information on hippocampal activation, we used previously established methods, utilizing anatomical landmarks to define a single set of structural regions of interest (ROIs) in the head, body, and tail of the hippocampus that were examined for task effects and group differences for each contrast (i.e., item change minus unchanged, spatial change minus unchanged). Given our hypotheses, results are summarized here only for the anterior (head) and posterior (tail) hippocampus, and body results are summarized in Supplementary Materials. The MNI coordinates marking the anterior/posterior, medial/lateral and superior/inferior bounds of the hippocampus were y = − 12/− 39, x = ± 18/±36, and z = 6/− 24. The hippocampus was subdivided into three sections of equal length – an anterior segment corresponding to the head, a middle segment corresponding to body, and a posterior segment corresponding to the tail (for a similar approach see). ROI analysis was followed by exploratory whole-brain analyses to identify additional task effects and group differences.
For each ROI, voxelwise one-sample t-tests identified activated voxel clusters for two contrasts (item change minus unchanged, spatial change minus unchanged), across all participants, with a voxelwise threshold of z > 2.3, and a corrected cluster mass significance threshold of p < 0.05 based on Gaussian Random Field theory as implemented in FEAT. Resulting parameter estimates (beta weights) were extracted from anterior and posterior ROIs and averaged across hemispheres for each participant. Differences in parameter estimates as a function of group (patients, controls) and change condition (item, spatial) was evaluated using repeated measures analysis of variance (ANOVA) in SAS (version 9.3) separately for anterior and posterior hippocampus. Effect sizes for any significant group differences were estimated using Cohen's d. For the exploratory whole-brain analyses, two-sample t-tests were used to identify any group differences for each contrast, using the FSL whole brain gray matter mask, with the same thresholding and cluster-correction procedures as the ROI analysis.