Title.
Decreased Thalamocortical Connectivity in Chronic Ketamine Users.
Abstract.
Disintegration in thalamocortical integration suggests its role in the mechanistic ‘switch’ from recreational to dysregulated drug seeking/addiction. In this study, we aimed to address whether thalamic nuclear groups show altered functional connectivity within the cerebral cortex in chronic ketamine users. One hundred and thirty subjects (41 ketamine users and 89 control subjects) underwent rsfMRI (resting-state functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging). Based on partial correlation functional connectivity analysis we partitioned the thalamus into six nuclear groups that correspond well with human histology. Then, in the area of each nuclear group, the functional connectivity differences between the chronic ketamine user group and normal control group were investigated. We found that the ketamine user group showed significantly less connectivity between the thalamic nuclear groups and the cortical regions-of-interest, including the prefrontal cortex, the motor cortex /supplementary motor area, and the posterior parietal cortex. However, no increased thalamic connectivity was observed for these regions as compared with controls. This study provides the first evidence of abnormal thalamocortical connectivity of resting state brain activity in chronic ketamine users. Further understanding of pathophysiological mechanisms of the thalamus in addiction (ketamine addiction) may facilitate the evaluation of much-needed novel pharmacological agents for improved therapy of this complex disease.
Introduction.
Ketamine is a “dissociative” anesthetic drug and a derivative of PCP (phencyclidine), but with a shorter duration of action and less toxicity. Ketamine was first synthesized in 1962 by an American chemist Calvin Lee Stevens in the Parke-Davis Laboratories. In 1970 the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved ketamine for human medical use as an anesthetic drug. However, it is also a psychedelic drug that can produce psychological dependence. Recently, ketamine has been used as an illicit drug inside and outside of club and rave scenes in many parts of the world, such as China, Indonesia, Malaysia, and Australia. There are multiple dangers associated with nonmedical use and abuse of ketamine, such as dependence and psychiatric morbidity, lower urinary tract dysfunction, brain structural and functional abnormality, and sexual impulsiveness or violence.
Drug addiction (including ketamine) results in deficits in cognitive and emotional processes, which are involved in the thalamocortical network. The thalamus plays a central and dynamic role in information transmission and processing in the brain by controlling corticocortical information that is being passed through the thalamus from one cortical area to another. The thalamus is composed of a very complex circuitry between multiple brain regions, including the prefrontal cortex, anterior cingulate, basal ganglia, cerebellum, motor and sensory regions, and association regions of the cerebral cortex. Thus, the thalamus may play a role as an active partner in the whole brain of cortical computations. Disintegration in the thalamocortical network is a change associated with addiction, it also suggests it plays a mechanistic role in the 'switch' from recreational to dysregulated drug seeking.
Resting state functional connectivity is a relatively novel fMRI approach that provides insight for investigations in intrinsic brain connections, critical neurocircuits and pathophysiological alterations in a variety of neuropsychiatric disorders, including schizophrenia and addiction. A functional connectivity study demonstrated the relationship of resting brain hyperconnectivity and schizophrenia-like symptoms produced by ketamine infusion in 22 healthy humans. Understanding chronic use of ketamine and its impact on resting state functional connectivity may help us to understand the neurobiological mechanism for addiction, and given its special role in neuropsychiatric disorders may provide some implications in treatment-resistant depression and schizophrenia.
In this study we used rsfMRI to test whether thalamocortical connectivity is altered in chronic ketamine users. Evidence shows that learning and performance factors are integrated into a network centered on the mediodorsal thalamus. Additionally, deficits in goal-directed control and a consequent dysregulation of habit learning processes could result in compulsive drug seeking. Given this evidence we hypothesize that thalamic nuclear groups would show altered resting state functional connectivity (RSFC) in the cerebral cortex of chronic ketamine users (ketamine addicts) when compared with healthy controls.
Methods.
Study population.
One hundred and thirty subjects (41 ketamine dependent subjects and 89 drug-free healthy subjects) were enrolled in this study. All subjects were Han Chinese and between the ages of 19–39 with normal or corrected-to-normal vision. Ketamine dependent volunteers were recruited from two sites in Changsha city: the Kangda Voluntary Drug Rehabilitation Centers in Hunan Province and the Department of Addiction Medicine, Hunan Brain Hospital. All ketamine users met the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-IV) criteria for lifetime ketamine dependence determined by the Structured Clinical Interview (SCID). Ketamine subjects were excluded if they met criteria for other substance dependence (excluding nicotine dependence) at any time, past and present. Drug free healthy control subjects were recruited through a combination of targeted site sampling, advertisement, and snowball sampling referrals. All participants were Han Chinese with no history of neurological disorder or other psychiatric illness; neither did they have a first degree relative with substance abuse or a history of psychiatric illness. Additionally, any participant that tested positive for pregnancy was excluded from participation. A licensed psychiatrist conducted all clinical interviews.
The protocol was approved by the university ethics committee (The Second Xiangya Hospital of Central South University Review Board, No. S054, 2008) as well as carried out in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki. All subjects were informed about all procedures and any potential risks associated with the procedures. Once provided this information, written informed consent was obtained by all subjects. Craving for both ketamine and smoking were assessed by The Visual Analogue Scale for Craving (VASc). The VASc assesses craving using a scale from 0–10, where a score of 0 represents null craving and a score of 10 represents the most extreme craving. The Digit Symbol Test (DST), Trail Making Test A (TMTA) and The Stroop Color—Word Test (CWT) were also used to measure subject’s cognitive functioning.
Scan acquisition.
MR imaging was carried out using a Siemens Magnetom Trio 3.0T MR scanner (Erlangen, Germany). Functional images were collected axially by using an echo-planar imaging (EPI) sequence sensitive to BOLD contrast. The acquisition parameters were as follows: 36 slices, 3000/30 ms (TR/TE), 4 mm thickness, 220×220 mm (FOV), 64×64 (resolution within slice), 90° (flip angle). The FOV covered all brain regions for all participants. Resting state was collected during the fMRI and lasted 9 minutes with 180 volumes obtained. During the resting state scan all subjects were instructed to stay as motionless as possible with their eyes closed and to not think of anything in particular. Additionally, for spatial normalization, each participant received a 3D anatomical MRI image with a T1-weighted magnetization-prepared rapid-acquisition gradient echo (MP-RAGE). The protocol was as follows: sagittal, repetition time = 2000 ms, echo time = 2.26 ms, inversion time = 900 ms, flip angle = 8°, slice thickness = 1 mm, FOV = 256 × 256 mm2, in-plane resolution = 1 × 1 mm2.
Data preprocessing.
Functional MRIs were preprocessed using SPM8 and in-house programs on the Matlab 2010 platform. Of the 180 scans obtained for each participant, the first 5 were discarded to allow the MR signal to reach a steady state. The remaining fMRI scans underwent preprocessing that included slice timing, motion correction, registration and normalization to a standard Montreal Neurological Institute (MNI) space, and resampling to a stereoscopic 3 mm3. The resulting data were checked to ensure alignment and spatial correspondence. Next, any linear trend shifts and head motion were removed voxel wise by regression. Finally, to reduce low-frequency drift and high-frequency noise, the fMRI data were temporally filtered using a band-pass range between 0.01 and 0.08 Hz with AFNI (http://afni.nimh.nih.gov/). It is noted that the spatial smoothing was omitted to maximize resolution in the analyses of thalamus nuclei groups, which are smaller brain structures. Additionally, we found that the average BOLD signal across all voxels in the brain was significantly correlated with the average time series within the thalamus as reported in other studies. These results confirm that the study did not regress out of the global signal within the brain.
Cortical ROI definition.
To investigate the specific functional relationships between the cortex and the thalamus, nuclei groups within the thalamus were partitioned into several nuclei groups using the methods proposed in previous studies. Since there are distinct connections between thalamic sub-regions and the cerebral cortex, specific functional relationships between them can be used to parcel the thalamus into nuclear subdivisions. In concurrence with relevant research knowledge this study divided the cortex into 6 non-overlapping regions of interest: the prefrontal cortex, motor cortex/supplementary motor area, somatosensory cortex, temporal cortex, posterior parietal cortex, and occipital cortex. We used the Harvard-Oxford maximum probabilistic atlas of cortical structures (http://www.fmrib.ox.ac.uk/fsl/) to construct these regions of interest as shown in a previous study. The cortical regions of interest (ROIs) are shown in Fig 1A, along with the details of the six regions of interest listed in S1 Table. In short, the prefrontal cortex ROI consisted of the superior, middle, and inferior frontal gyri, the middle and lateral orbitofrontal gyri, the gyrus rectus, and the anterior cingulate gyrus. Additionally, the motor cortex/supplementary motor area ROIs consisted of the precentral gyrus and the supplementary motor area. The somatosensory region of interest was the postcentral gyrus. The temporal lobe region of interest consisted of the superior, middle, and inferior temporal gyri, the parahippocampal gyrus, and the fusiform gyrus. The posterior parietal region of interest consisted of the superior parietal, the supramarginal, the angular gyri, the posterior cingulate, and the precuneus. Finally, the occipital region of interest consisted of the superior, middle, and inferior occipital gyri, the lingual gyrus, and the cuneus.
Partial correlation mapping between cortical regions-of-interest and thalamus.
The average fMRI time course was extracted from each cortical ROI. Partial correlations were computed for each voxel in the thalamus using these time courses. Specifically, after eliminating the influence of all other cortical ROIs, the results show a partial correlation between the local thalamic signal and the cortical ROI. To calculate statistical significance partial correlation coefficients were converted to a normal distribution using Fisher’s R-to-Z transformation. From this conversion we computed partial correlations between each thalamic voxel and each of the six cortical ROIs for each subject.
Group-level Statistical analysis.
For both ketamine-dependent subjects and drug free healthy controls we checked the thalamocortical connectivity patterns between the six regions of interest in the cortex compared to the distinct areas of the thalamus using a one-sample t-test. Then, we used a two-sample t-test to investigate whether there were significant differences in the thalamocortical connectivity patterns between the two groups. In this study, the AlphaSim program of the AFNI software package was used to correct for multiple comparisons. Parameters were as follows: single P value = 0.01, FWHM = 0, cluster connection radius r = 6.00 mm, mask of the thalamus with a resolution of 3*3*3 mm, and a number of Monte Carlo iterations = 1000. Finally, we explored whether there was a significant Pearson’s correlation between the strength of partial correlation and various ketamine use variables and behavioral scores in the ketamine dependent subjects. Behavioral scores included duration of ketamine abuse, daily average use of ketamine, total quantity of ketamine use, ketamine craving scores and cognitive test scores.