Title.
Regional and source-based patterns of [11C]-(+)-PHNO binding potential reveal concurrent alterations in dopamine D2 and D3 receptor availability in cocaine-use disorder.
Abstract.
Dopamine type 2 and type 3 receptors (D2R/D3R) appear critical to addictive disorders. Cocaine-use disorder (CUD) is associated with lower D2R availability and greater D3R availability in regions primarily expressing D2R or D3R concentrations, respectively. However, these CUD-related alterations in D2R and D3R have not been concurrently detected using available dopaminergic radioligands. Furthermore, receptor availability in regions of mixed D2R/D3R concentration in CUD remains unclear. The current study aimed to extend investigations of CUD-related alterations in D2R and D3R availability using regional and source-based analyses of [11C]-(+)-PHNO positron emission tomography (PET) of 26 individuals with CUD and 26 matched healthy comparison (HC) participants. Regional analysis detected greater binding potential (BPND) in CUD in the midbrain, consistent with prior [11C]-(+)-PHNO research, and lower BPND in CUD in the dorsal striatum, consistent with research using non-selective D2R/D3R radiotracers. Exploratory independent component analysis (ICA) identified three sources of BPND (striatopallidal, pallidonigral, and mesoaccumbens sources) that represent systems of brain regions displaying coherent variation in receptor availability. The striatopallidal source was associated with estimates of regional D2R-related proportions of BPND (calculated using independent reports of [11C]-(+)-PHNO receptor binding fractions), was lower in intensity in CUD and negatively associated with years of cocaine use. By comparison, the pallidonigral source was associated with estimates of regional D3R distribution, was greater in intensity in CUD and positively associated with years of cocaine use. The current study extends previous D2R/D3R research in CUD, demonstrating both lower BPND in the D2R-rich dorsal striatum and greater BPND in the D3R-rich midbrain using a single radiotracer. In addition, exploratory ICA identified sources of [11C]-(+)-PHNO BPND that were correlated with regional estimates of D2R-related and D3R-related proportions of BPND, were consistent with regional differences in CUD, and suggest receptor alterations in CUD may also be present in regions of mixed D2R/D3R concentration.
1. Introduction.
Individuals with cocaine-use disorder (CUD) exhibit alterations in subcortical dopamine including alterations in receptor availability, blunted dopamine release and reduced dopamine transport mechanisms. However, dopaminergic pharmacotherapies for stimulant-related addictions have displayed limited efficacy to date (see), thus a greater understanding of dopamine-related alterations in CUD may improve targeted interventions for addictions. Alterations in dopamine type-2 and type-3 receptors (D2R/D3R) are associated with CUD and other substance-use disorders, suggesting related neurobiological mechanisms that may hold potential as targets in treating addictions. Specifically, D2Rs and D3Rs are implicated in the habitual and compulsive behaviors associated with the persistence of chronic drug use and relapse. Animal models demonstrate functional dissociation of D2R and D3R systems, suggesting these dopamine receptor subtypes may provide distinct contributions to addictive processes.
Research using dopamine-antagonist radioligands with equal affinities for D2R and D3Rs (e.g., [11C]raclopride) indicate lower receptor availability in D2R-rich striatal regions of individuals with CUD. By comparison, research using the D3R-preferring dopamine-agonist radioligand [11C]-(+)-PHNO in CUD and stimulant addiction indicate increased receptor availability in the D3R-rich midbrain. These concurrently upregulated and downregulated dopamine systems in CUD may undermine dopaminergic therapies for cocaine addiction. Adding to this complexity, D2R and D3R are both expressed in structures central to addiction (e.g., midbrain, ventral striatum, pallidum), and assessing potential alterations of specific receptor subtypes in these regions is challenging.
Regional binding of [11C]-(+)-PHNO reflects local concentrations of both D2Rs and D3Rs, allowing for simultaneous imaging of D2R/D3R not possible using other D2-like receptor radioligands. To date however, [11C]-(+)-PHNO research of CUD has not replicated findings of lower receptor availability in the D2R-rich dorsal striatum, or detected alterations in mixed-D2R/D3R regions. However, these results of non-altered D2R-like availability in the striatum in CUD are consistent with research using alternative dopamine-agonist radioligands with equal affinities for D2R/D3R (e.g., [11C]NPA). The current study aimed to further examine D2R and D3R alterations in the midbrain, striatum and other subcortical structures (e.g., globus pallidus, ventral pallidum and hypothalamus) in CUD using [11C]-(+)-PHNO positron emission tomography (PET) imaging. Investigation of regional [11C]-(+)-PHNO BPND was conducted on individuals with CUD and matched healthy comparison (HC) participants.
In addition, exploratory spatial independent component analysis (ICA) was performed on [11C]-(+)-PHNO BPND data to examine D2R and D3R using a source-based approach. ICA is a data-driven computational procedure that decomposes or ‘un-mixes’ a measured signal into its maximal spatially independent ‘sources’. While [11C]-(+)-PHNO exhibits an estimated 20- to 50-fold selectivity in vivo for D3Rs relative to D2Rs, local BPND reflects a weighted sum of D2R/D3R concentrations. That is, [11C]-(+)-PHNO BPND primarily reflects D3R availability in D3-rich regions (e.g., substantia nigra), D2R availability in D2-rich regions (e.g., dorsal striatum), and an aggregate of D2R and D3R availability in mixed D2R/D3R regions (e.g. ventral striatum). This unique mixed-signal nature of [11C]-(+)-PHNO strongly motivates the utility of source-based analyses like ICA to un-mix the D2R and D3R components of BPND and examine distinct sources of receptor availability.
We hypothesized that CUD-related reductions in D2R availability in the dorsal striatum would be detectable using [11C]-(+)-PHNO in a large sample, and that CUD-related increases in D3R availability in the midbrain would be confirmed. We also hypothesized that the exploratory ICA would identify sources of [11C]-(+)-PHNO BPND consistent with estimates of regional proportions of D2R-related and D3R-related BPND, with mixed-D2R/D3R regions incorporated into multiple sources. Consistent with research demonstrating regional differences in D2R and D3R in CUD, we hypothesized that individuals with CUD would exhibit increased intensity of sources that include D3-rich regions and reduced intensity of sources that include D2-rich regions. Finally, we examined relationships between regional BPND and source intensities with duration of cocaine use.
2. Methods and Materials.
2.1. Participants.
Participants were 26 non-treatment seeking individuals with CUD and 26 age- and gender-matched HC participants, most of whom (22 CUD and 21 HC) were included in previous reports (Table 1). Physical exams with medical history, routine laboratory studies, pregnancy tests and electrocardiograms (ECGs) were performed to assess medical health eligibility criteria. Urine toxicology screening for a range of drugs (including cocaine, amphetamines, marijuana, opiates, benzodiazepines, barbiturates) were performed to confirm cocaine-use status in CUD participants and the absence of other recent drug use in both CUD and HC participants. Participants were assessed for DSM-IV diagnoses using clinical interviews (SCID; MINI). Participants meeting criteria for cocaine dependence (i.e., presenting with 3 or more criteria) were included in the CUD sample. Exclusion criteria included the presence or history of a general medical illness or psychotic disorder, pregnancy or breast feeding, or any condition that would interfere with the ability to participate in PET or MRI protocols (e.g., claustrophobia, metallic implants). All study procedures were approved by the Yale Human Investigation, Yale University Radiation Safety, Yale-New Haven Hospital Radioactive Drug Research, and Yale MRI Safety Committees, and participants provided written informed consent.
2.2. Radiochemistry and image acquisition.
[11C]-(+)-PHNO was prepared as previously described. Radioactive dose, specific activity and injected mass for CUD and HC groups are listed in Table 1. PET imaging was performed on a Siemens high-resolution research tomograph (HRRT; Siemens/CTI, Knoxville, TN, USA). A transmission scan was obtained before the emission scan. PET scans (slices=207, slice separation=1.2mm, reconstructed image resolution ~3 mm) were acquired for 120 min at rest. Head motion was measured using an optical detector (Vicra, NDI Systems, Waterloo, Ontario, Canada). MR images were collected on a Siemens 3T Trio system (Siemens Medical Solutions, Malvern, PA) using a magnetization prepared rapid acquisition gradient echo (MPRAGE) sequence (repeat time (TR)/echo time (TE)=2530/3.34, flip angle=7°, in-plane resolution=0.98×0.98 mm, matrix=256×256, slice thickness=1mm, slices=176).
2.3. Image processing.
Dynamic PET data (frame timing: 6×30s; 3×60s; 2×120s; 22×300s) were reconstructed with corrections (attenuation, normalization, scatter, randoms, deadtime and motion) using the MOLAR algorithm. Parametric images of [11C]-(+)-PHNO BPND were computed using a simplified reference tissue model (SRTM2) with the cerebellum as reference. Registration of individual images into MNI152 space was performed using SPM12 (Wellcome Trust Centre for Neuroimaging, London, UK). A summed [11C]-(+)-PHNO uptake (0–10 min post-injection) image was created from the motion-corrected PET data and rigid-body registered to the subject's MR image. Nonlinear registration of the MR image to MNI152 space was determined using optimized unified segmentation. The combined rigid-body and nonlinear registrations were applied to the parametric BPND, and smoothed with a 4mm FWHM Gaussian kernel.
2.4. Analyses of regional [11C]-(+)-PHNO BPND.
Seven regions of interest (ROIs) were examined: dorsal caudate (DCA), dorsal putamen (DPU), globus pallidus (GP), hypothalamus (HY), substantia nigra (SN), ventral pallidum (VP), and ventral striatum (VS). ROIs were defined using previously described guidelines. DCA, DPU and VS ROIs were obtained from FSL (Oxford Centre for Functional MRI of the Brain, Oxford, UK). GP, HY, and VP ROIs were manually drawn on the ICBM-MNI52 template (Montreal Neurological Institute, Montreal, Canada). The SN ROI was manually defined on a group-average parametric [11C]-(+)-PHNO BPND image from an independent sample. Regional [11C]-(+)-PHNO BPND was determined from the individual smoothed parametric BPND images in standard space. ROI volumes were calculated by inverse transformation of template regions into individual native space. A confirmatory whole-brain, between-group analysis was performed on BPND images using a two-sample t-test in SPM12 with a relative threshold mask (0.8; displayed in Figure 1). Due to the relatively low BPND signal (less than 0.5) in the thalamic and amygdala regions included in previous reports, substantial portions of these structures did not survive threshold masking and thus were excluded from ROI analyses. Group differences were explored at an uncorrected significance level of p<0.005, and cluster extent (k) >20 contiguous voxels.
2.5. Independent component analysis (ICA).
Exploratory ICA was performed on parametric images of [11C]-(+)-PHNO BPND using the source-based morphometry (SBM) module of the Group ICA of fMRI Toolbox (GIFT v2.0e; http://mialab.mrn.org/software/gift). Using higher order statistics, ICA identifies maximally independent vectors that comprise an unknown linear mixture (A) of mostly non-Gaussian sources (s) that generate a random variable (x). Given x = As, ICA solves for y =Wx, or the estimated un-mixing matrix (W) of approximated source maps (y). Parametric images of all 52 participants were entered into the ICA to allow direct comparison of source loadings. The analysis was constrained to data within the relative threshold mask determined in the GLM analysis (described above), and with no prior information as to group membership. A modified minimum-description-length (MDL) criterion estimated the dimensionality of the dataset to consist of three sources which were extracted from the aggregate dataset using a neural-network algorithm designed to minimize mutual information of source outputs (InfoMax).
Output from the ICA included the spatial source maps (yM;M =1,2,3) and subject ICA-loading values (Ã; 1M,i;i = 1, …, 52), where Ã denotes the estimate of the unknown mixing matrix A (i.e. the inverse of ICA-derived un-mixing matrix W). Note that applications of ICA to biomedical images typically employ principal component analysis (PCA) for data reduction prior to ICA; thus, subject ICA-loadings also incorporate the PCA-reduction factor (R) and are more accurately characterized as (R × Ã), but for convenience, we use Ã to represent the final subject ICA-loading parameters. The subject ICA-loading values represent the source ‘intensity’ or relative strength to which each subject’s BPND data contained a given source. The spatial source maps were ‘intensity-scaled’ such that (yM × Ã) reflects the relative contribution of each source to the aggregate BPND signal, where ÃM,iis the average subject intensity for source M, and: where x̃ is the approximate reconstruction of the original data x, and x̄ is the global mean BPND value (1.56) removed prior to ICA extraction. For analysis purposes, the source maps were scaled to ICA-estimated BPND (B̃PM) through the product of (yM × ÃM,i). For display and anatomical assignment purposes, the scaled source maps were thresholded at B̃PM≥0.5 (with no cluster-extent threshold) based on the relevant range of [11C]-(+)-PHNO BPND of 1.5–4.
To examine source compositions relative to regional estimates of D2R/D3R availability, intensity-scaled source maps were generated for all subjects, and regional B̃PM values were extracted from the seven ROIs and compared the D2R-related and D3R-related proportions of BPND calculated using reported regional fractions of [11C]-(+)-PHNO BPND. That is, regional BPND values obtained in the ROI-based analysis (see Section 2.4. and Figure 1) were multiplied by average D2R-and D3R-related fractions reported in (Supplementary Table 1) to obtain regional estimates of local D2R/D3R BPND (i.e., ). Average regional B̃PM for each source were then examined in relation to the calculated estimates of  and  using Pearson correlations to assess potential association with D2R-related and D3R-related BPND proportions.
2.6. Statistical procedures.
Group differences in ROI BPND values and ICA source intensities were assessed with two separate multivariate analyses of variance (i.e., group × ROI and group × source) and post-hoc univariate analyses. Due to non-tracer conditions of [11C]-(+)-PHNO for D3Rs at the administered dose, multivariate analyses including the estimated free concentration of [11C]-(+)-PHNO (based on the average mass concentration in the cerebellum from 90–120 mins, multiplied by the specific activity) as a covariate were performed and revealed no significant mass dose effect on results (p’s>0.4). Given reported associations between [11C]-(+)-PHNO BPND and age and body-mass, all between-group multivariate and univariate analyses were repeated adjusting for age and body-mass. Additional analyses were performed to examine potential influences of alcohol use across all participants and cigarette smoking within CUD participants. Exploratory correlational analyses were performed to examine relationships between regional and source-based binding measures with years of cocaine use.