Title.
Using concurrent EEG and fMRI to probe the state of the brain in schizophrenia.
Abstract.
Perceptional abnormalities in schizophrenia are associated with hallucinations and delusions, but also with negative symptoms and poor functional outcome. Perception can be studied using EEG-derived event related potentials (ERPs). Because of their excellent temporal resolution, ERPs have been used to ask when perception is affected by schizophrenia. Because of its excellent spatial resolution, functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) has been used to ask where in the brain these effects are seen. We acquired EEG and fMRI data simultaneously to explore when and where auditory perception is affected by schizophrenia.
Thirty schizophrenia (SZ) patients and 23 healthy comparison subjects (HC) listened to 1000 Hz tones occurring about every second. We used joint independent components analysis (jICA) to combine EEG-based event-related potential (ERP) and fMRI responses to tones.
Five ERP-fMRI joint independent components (JIC) were extracted. The “N100” JIC had temporal weights during N100 (peaking at 100 ms post-tone onset) and fMRI spatial weights in superior and middle temporal gyri (STG/MTG); however, it did not differ between groups. The “P200” JIC had temporal weights during P200 and positive fMRI spatial weights in STG/MTG and frontal areas, and negative spatial weights in the nodes of the default mode network (DMN) and visual cortex. Groups differed on the “P200” JIC: SZ had smaller “P200” JIC, especially those with more severe avolition/apathy. This is consistent with negative symptoms being related to perceptual deficits, and suggests patients with avolition/apathy may allocate too few resources to processing external auditory events and too many to processing internal events.
Highlights.
Perceptual deficits in schizophrenia (SZ) were assessed using concurrent EEG + fMRI.
Joint independent components (JIC) analysis integrated EEG-based ERP and fMRI data.
“N100” and “P200” JICs were associated with auditory cortical activity.
“P200” JIC was inversely related to visual and default mode network (DMN) activity.
SZ had smaller “P200” JICs, especially those with severe negative symptoms.
Introduction.
Perception and schizophrenia.
Perception involves the identification and interpretation of sensory information in the service of understanding and navigating the environment. It is influenced by expectations and attention and results from a convergence of bottom-up and top-down processes, as the brain predicts the content and arrival of information. Its disruption in schizophrenia has been associated with a range of symptoms, the most obvious being hallucinations and the inability to distinguish between what is real and what is not (e.g.,). Recently, disruptions in perception have been associated with defeatist beliefs, negative symptoms, and poor functional outcome.
Assessing perception has traditionally been done with a variety of behavioral methods, but is also studied using EEG-derived event related potentials (ERPs). Because of their excellent millisecond temporal resolution, ERPs have been used to inform us about when auditory processing is affected by a variety of psychological variables, such as attention and distraction. The different components of the ERP can also provide information about the transition from sensation to perception.
Brief history of ERPs to study perception.
Over 50 years ago, ERPs were used in audiometry to assess hearing in people whose behavioral reports could not be obtained or trusted. A negative going potential, peaking 100 milliseconds (ms) after stimulus onset, was called N1 or N100. Because its amplitude increased with increasing loudness, N100 was considered a reasonable index of hearing. N100 is followed by P2 or P200, a positive going potential, peaking at about 200 ms. The N100-P200 complex was largest at the vertex of the head and called the “vertex potential.” For years, it was measured as the peak-to-peak difference between N100 and P200 (i.e. “N100-P200” or “N1-P2”).
Although P200 invariably follows N100, they can be distinguished both experimentally and topographically on the scalp. Yet, N100 and P200 often co-vary. Thus, although structures that generate them may overlap to some extent, N100 and P200 waves are unlikely to reflect a single underlying neural process, and therefore, are best measured and studied independently of each other.
N100.
In the 1970s, its sensitivity to attention and arousal shifted N100 out the realm of audiometry and into cognitive neuroscience. There is general consensus that N100 to a tone is augmented by selective attention, when that tone is in an attended channel. Data from a variety of sources suggest that N100 emanates generally from primary and secondary auditory cortical areas, namely superior temporal gyrus (STG) and middle temporal gyrus (MTG), indirectly suggesting that attention to auditory events is associated with increased activity in these regions of the temporal lobe.
P200.
The functional significance of P200 is poorly understood. P200 may reflect an attention-modulated process required for the performance of an auditory discrimination task, or when elicited by a non-target stimulus in an oddball paradigm, it may reflect an attentional shift towards the stimulus and some aspects of the classification process. The brain areas responsible for P200 generation are also less well studied, but likely include both STG and MTG. Thus, although both are obligatory responses to tones, N100 and P200 might be considered reflections of different perceptual stages in the auditory processing stream.
N100, P200, and schizophrenia.
N100 amplitude is typically, but not always, reduced in schizophrenia patients (see review by). Indeed, its reduction has been proposed as a trait marker of functional brain changes related to genetic predisposition to schizophrenia. N100 to probe tones may also be a state marker of the illness, as it is reduced during auditory hallucinations, perhaps reflecting distraction by the voices. It may also reflect a readiness to attend to voices rather than probe tones in patients who tend to have auditory hallucinations. In spite of its prominence in the schizophrenia literature and its importance for understanding the pathophysiology of schizophrenia, the precise neural generators of N100 have not been adequately explored.
P200 amplitude reductions are sometimes, but not always reported in schizophrenia. A meta-analysis indicated that P200s elicited by infrequent target tones are larger in schizophrenia, while P200s elicited by standard frequent tones are smaller, contributing to ongoing confusion about the relevance of this ERP component to understanding the pathophysiology of schizophrenia.
Goals of this experiment.
To understand the different neural basis of N100 and P200, and how they are differentially affected by schizophrenia, we recorded EEG and fMRI data concurrently from patients and age-matched healthy controls. The EEG data provided the millisecond temporal precision needed to distinguish between rapidly resolving reflections of early (N100) and later (P200) stages of information processing, and the fMRI data provided the spatial/neuroanatomical precision needed to distinguish between areas of the brain involved in all stages of processing tones. Joint group Independent Components Analysis (jICA) allowed us to determine the patterns of spatial (with fMRI) and temporal (with ERP) covariance associated with processing tones. We focused on components in the temporal domain that load on traditional ERP waves (e.g. N100, P200) and their association with brain regions activated or even inhibited by tones in the spatial/neuroanatomical domain. Using jICA to integrate ERP and fMRI data allowed us to identify temporal-spatial relationships and their potential disruption in schizophrenia. We used a simple passive listening task to avoid confounding diagnostic effects with differences in cognition and motivation.
JICA is a blind source separation, unsupervised learning technique used to explain the underlying structure of multi-modal data. Thus, it is exploratory and data-driven in nature. Nevertheless based on the literature, we predicted that an “N100” joint component would reflect covariation of N100 amplitude and activity in STG, that a “P200” joint component would reflect covariation of P200 amplitude and activity in higher order cortical association areas. We also predicted that patients with schizophrenia would have smaller “N100” and “P200” joint independent components.
Materials and methods.
Participants.
Data are reported here from 30 patients with DSM-IV schizophrenia (N = 24) and schizoaffective disorder (N = 6) (hereinafter referred to as schizophrenia (SZ) patients), and 23 age- and gender-matched healthy comparison (HC) subjects (see below for description of why 8 SZ and 5 HC were dropped from the initial sample of 66 subjects.) Diagnoses were based on the Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV. Community outpatient clinicians referred SZ to us; both groups were recruited by advertisements and word of mouth.
Exclusion criteria for HC included any past or current major DSM-IV Axis I disorder based on a Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV Disorders, or having a first-degree relative with a psychotic disorder. For both groups, exclusion criteria were a history of a significant medical or neurological illness, head injury resulting in loss of consciousness, or substance abuse in the past 3 months. Additionally, HC did not have history of substance dependence (except nicotine), whereas SZ did not meet criteria for substance dependence within the past year. A psychiatrist or clinical psychologist conducted all interviews. Institutional Review Boards at the University of California at San Francisco and the San Francisco Veterans Affairs Medical Center approved the study, and all participants provided written informed consent. Clinical and demographic data are presented in Table 1 for those subjects included in the final analysis.
Clinical ratings.
A trained research assistant, along with a psychiatrist or clinical psychologist, rated schizophrenia symptoms using the Scale for the Assessment of Positive Symptoms (SAPS) and the Scale for the Assessment of Negative Symptoms (SANS).
Experimental tasks.
Subjects were instructed to, “Rest with your eyes open, look at a fixation cross, and listen to the sequence of tones you just generated.” They listened to a series of 500 ms, 1000 Hz tones, presented in 16 seconds (s) blocks alternating with 16 s blocks of rest. The first and last rest blocks lasted 30 s each to facilitate EEG artifact correction procedures described below. There were two runs with 10 Listen and 10 Rest blocks. The individual sequences of tones presented during the Listen task had been generated by each subject earlier when subjects pressed a button every 1 to 2 s to deliver a tone (the Self task). EEG responses to tones collected in the MR scanner during the Self task cannot be analyzed because a button press artifact occurs in the EEG at the exact moment of tone onset. However, the fMRI data were not affected and will be described in a separate paper.
There were no significant differences in the number of tones between the groups, t(51) = 0.80, p = 0.43; HC (mean = 182 ± 35), SZ (mean = 171 ± 58). The interval between tones (in seconds) also did not differ between groups, t(51) = − 1.3, p = 0.22, HC (mean = 0.95 ± 0.22), SZ (mean = 1.05 ± 0.35).
MRI data acquisition, preprocessing and analysis.
We collected structural and functional MRI data using a 3 T Siemens Skyra scanner. The structural imaging protocol was a magnetization-prepared rapid gradient-echo (MPRAGE) T1-weighted high-resolution image (2300 ms TR, 2.98 ms TE, 1.20 mm slice thickness, 256 mm field of view, 1.0 × 1.0 × 1.2 voxel size, flip angle 9°, sagittal orientation, 9:14 min). The fMRI protocol was an AC-PC aligned echo planar imaging (EPI) sequence (2000 ms TR, 30 ms TE, flip angle 77°, 30 slices collected sequentially in ascending order, 3.4 × 3.4 × 4.0 mm voxel size, 182 frames, 6:08 min).
Image preprocessing was done using Statistical Parametric Mapping 8 (SPM8; http://www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm/software/spm8/). First, motion correction was performed via affine registration of all runs, where the first image of each run was realigned to the first image of the first run, and then re-alignment proceeded within each run. Next, images were slice-time corrected with respect to the middle slice to adjust for timing differences of individual slices within each TR. To further denoise the data, we implemented aCompCor (anatomic component based noise correction), a principal components-based approach to noise reduction of fMRI time-series data. ACompCor derives principal components from the time series of voxels within noise regions of interest (ROIs) defined on eroded white matter and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) parcels from participants' segmented high-resolution T1-weighted anatomical images. To derive these white matter and CSF noise ROIs, the structural MRI scan was segmented using SPM 8, yielding a white matter map that was thresholded at p > 0.99 and eroded by 2 voxels, and a CSF map that was thresholded at p > 0.9 and eroded using a 3D nearest neighbor clustering criterion of at least two neighbors. A binary union mask of these white matter and CSF noise ROIs was generated and co-registered to the mean functional scan. Before proceeding with a principal component analysis (PCA) of the functional time series data of voxels contained in this co-registered white matter/CSF noise ROI mask, voxels in the mask that showed even weak relationships with the task regressors (p < 0.2) were excluded. Time series data for the remaining voxels in the noise ROI mask were then subjected to a PCA, and a number of noise (principal) components comprising weighted averages of white matter and CSF voxel time series were extracted. The number of components extracted was determined for each subject using a version of the broken stick method, a bootstrap procedure.
For individual participant (first-level) modeling of the fMRI data, an event-related analysis was implemented. SPM's canonical hemodynamic response function (a double gamma function) was convolved with task event vectors to create a first-level task regressor representing the predicted response of a voxel activated by the presented tones. After applying a high pass temporal filter (128 s cut-off) to remove low-frequency noise, a general linear model was implemented voxel-wise, regressing each voxel's time series on the task regressor, as well as on nuisance regressors consisting of the aCompCor noise components. Parameters (i.e. beta coefficients) representing the fit of the task regressor to a voxel's time series were estimated, and resulting beta images, reflecting the contrast of tones versus implicit baseline (rest blocks), were then averaged over the two task runs. Next, mean beta images were normalized by applying the spatial transformation matrix derived from normalization of the mean functional image (generated during motion correction) to the Montreal Neurological Institute's EPI template (http://www.bic.mni.mcgill.ca). Normalized beta images were resliced to 3 mm3 isotropic voxel dimensions using a fourth degree B-spline and were then spatially smoothed with a 6 mm full-width-half-maximum Gaussian kernel. Subsequently, each subject's first-level analysis brain mask image was normalized and applied to the smoothed beta image to mask out regions with insufficient signal intensity, as determined by SPM during first level modeling. In addition, a ventricular mask, generated using the Talairach Daemon database in Wake Forrest University's Pick Atlas, was used to mask out the lateral ventricles in the single subject normalized smoothed beta images.
EEG data acquisition, preprocessing, and analysis.
Continuous EEG data were collected from 32 sites using BrainAmp MR plus, with high-input impedance specifically designed for recordings in high magnetic fields (BrainProducts, Munich, Germany). We used sintered Ag/AgCl ring electrodes with 5 kΩ resistors embedded in an electrode cap according to the 10–20 system (Falk Minow Services, Herrsching, Germany). An electrode was placed on the lower back to monitor electrocardiograms (ECG). Electrode impedances were kept below 10 kΩ. The nonmagnetic, battery powered, EEG amplifier was placed behind the MRI head coil and stabilized with sandbags. The subject's head was immobilized using cushions. EEG data were transmitted via a fiber optic cable to a BrainAmp USB Adapter that synchronized the EEG acquisition clock to the MRI master clock via a SyncBox (BrainProducts) before transferring data via USB to a laptop computer placed outside the scanner room.
All 32 channels were recorded with FCz as reference and AFz as ground to minimize the distance between reference and recording sites and to prevent amplifier saturation. The data were recorded with a bandpass filter of 0.01–250 Hz and digitized at a rate of 5 kHz with 0.5 μV resolution (16 bit dynamic range, 16.38 mV).
Removal of artifacts from EEG.
EEG data were corrected for MR gradient artifacts by applying modified algorithms proposed by as implemented in Brain Vision Analyzer 2.0.4.368 software (BrainProducts). Next, the ECG channel was bandpass filtered 1–20 Hz to facilitate heartbeat detection and subsequent ballistocardiac artifact correction (see Appendix A for details.)
Canonical correlation-based denoising of EEG.
Canonical correlation analysis (CCA) was used as a blind source separation technique to remove broadband or electromyography (EMG) noise from single trial EEG data using a method similar to that used by others with some important differences. The CCA de-noising procedure involves correlating time series data from all channels with the one-sample time-lagged series from all channels, which is the multivariate equivalent of auto-regressive time series correlation. Each set of canonical correlation coefficients (one for each scalp electrode resulting in 31 for this study) has an associated time series (i.e. linear function of the coefficients and raw data called canonical variates). The fast Fourier transformed (FFT) power spectra of these canonical variate time series have been used to identify EMG components by taking the ratio of high (e.g. 15 to 30 Hz) to low (e.g. < 15 Hz) power and removing components with ratios greater than a pre-determined limit (e.g. if high/low > 1/5 in). This is a very rough heuristic for determining if a canonical variate's power spectrum has power-law scaling (e.g. 1/fβ or fα, where − β = α) where log-transformed power decreases linearly with increasing log-transformed frequency. Previous studies have suggested that the exponent, α, is less than − 1 in human EEG, while white noise or EMG would have an exponent of approximately zero.
Using simple linear regression, we estimated α by predicting log-power with log-frequency. For each trial and canonical variate, a bootstrap confidence interval was constructed for the estimated α by randomly sampling, without replacement, half of the frequency bins between 1 and 125 Hz from the FFT one thousand times to avoid potential contamination by a few frequencies (i.e. 60 Hz or alpha-band). If the interval contained values less than − 1, the component was retained while all others were algebraically removed during back-projection to the original EEG epoch space (see Appendix A for details.)
Final EEG denoising, artifact removal, and ERP derivation.
Single trial EEG data were re-referenced to an average reference, and data were obtained for the prior reference channel, FCz. Shorter, − 100 to 250 ms epochs were created for the final processing steps. Outlier trials were rejected based on previously established criteria. Prior to conducting an independent components analysis (ICA) of the EEG data, we initially conducted a principal components analysis (PCA) on the stacked single trial 350 time-point × 32 channel EEG data matrices to reduce the data. The number of principal components to extract was estimated separately for each subject using a parallel test approach. This involved comparing the eigenvalues from the PCA of the stacked, single trial EEG data correlation matrix to eigenvalues from a PCA of a thousand completely simulated random normal data matrices of equal rank. A 95% cutoff, derived from the simulated data eigenvalue distribution, was used to determine how many components to extract from the EEG data. All subjects had 3, 4, or 5 components with eigenvalues exceeding this cut-off, and neither the number of components (HC: 3.61 ± 0.737, SZ: 3.45 ± 0.602; t(64) = 0.9686, p = 0.3364), nor the percentage of variance explained by those selected components (HC: 91.1 ± 3.7%, SZ: 92.6 ± 2.8%; t(64) = − 1.74, p = 0.0824) significantly differed between groups. ICA was then performed on each subject's single trial EEG data in EEGLAB with initial PCA dimension reduction (i.e. number of components to extract from EEG) set according to the previous estimate. Two researchers independently inspected individual component properties (i.e. fronto-central N100-P200 spatial loading, auditory evoked potential time course of ERP average from the component's single trial epochs, and 1/f power spectrum) to identify ERP-related independent components (ICs) and to exclude artifact-related ICs, and then they conferred to achieve consensus on which ICs to retain. Data from 13 (5 HC, 8 SZ) subjects were dropped from further analysis because zero components were selected (i.e. none of the ICs satisfied the criteria used to identify EEG/ERP ICs). The mean framewise displacement in this group of 13 participants suggested significantly greater mean motion values (median = 0.1656) than the 53 participants included in the analysis (median = 0.0856) using a Wilcoxon rank sum test (Z = 3.466, W = 651, p = 0.0005). Retained IC single trial data were then back-projected and averaged to generate a separate cleaned ERP for each subject and channel. Resulting ERP waveforms were low-pass filtered at 30 Hz.
Integration of EEG and fMRI data.
We conducted a joint independent components analysis (jICA) using the Matlab-based Fusion ICA Toolbox or “FIT”. Joint ICA is a multi-modal data reduction technique that has been used to combine ERP and fMRI data collected simultaneously or in separate sessions. FIT uses each subject's ERP and fMRI data (i.e. ERP time courses and fMRI beta maps) concatenated side-by-side. The ERP time course is re-sampled to a higher rate such that the number of ERP time samples and the number of fMRI spatial samples are equal. Sources associated with these modalities are assumed to co-vary the same way across groups and subjects (i.e. equal linear covariation).
Prior to calculating the jICA, the number of components in each imaging modality was estimated. FIT estimated the number of fMRI components to be 5 based on the minimum description length. The parallel test approach was used on the ERP data, indicating that there were 3 components in that modality. We chose the larger of these two numbers (N = 5) in the jICA, and each of the 5 components estimated had fMRI and ERP loadings that represented different patterns of spatio-temporal covariance between the modalities. Each subject had coefficients or scores associated with these 5 components' loadings that could be used in statistical tests. However, we first checked the validity of each component with a method similar to that used by others. Specifically, the grand average ERP time course was regressed on the IC time course, and a peak (i.e. maximum absolute value) was picked from the fitted values of that regression model. There were only two components with monophasic waveforms and peaks that exceeded one standard deviation (0.6724 μV) of the grand average ERP. These two components captured the N100 and P200 peaks (Fig. 1, Fig. 2), and are referred to as the “N100” and “P200” linked components to distinguish them from the N100 and P200 ERP components. Individual subject joint component scores for these linked components were retained for subsequent analyses. These scores were compared between groups using independent samples t-tests.
Relating clinical data to jICA data.
To assess the relationship between symptoms and neurophysiological data, we correlated the “N100” and “P200” joint independent component scores (JICs) to the 9 global ratings from SANS and SAPS, listed in Table 1. The significance level for each component was Bonferroni corrected to 0.05/9 = 0.006.