Title.
Blunted Frontostriatal BOLD Signals Predict Stimulant and Marijuana Use.
Abstract.
Background.
Occasional, recreational stimulant (amphetamine and cocaine) use is an important public health problem among young adults because 16% of those who experiment develop stimulant use disorder (SUD). This study aimed to determine whether behavioral and/or neural processing measures can forecast the transition from occasional to problematic stimulant use.
Methods.
Occasional stimulant users (OSU) completed a Risky Gains Task during functional magnetic resonance imaging and were followed up three years later. Categorical analyses tested whether blood oxygen level dependent (BOLD) responses differentiated OSU who became problem stimulant users (PSU; n=35) from those who desisted stimulant use (DSU; n=75) at follow-up. Dimensional analyses (regardless of PSU or DSU membership; n=144) tested whether BOLD responses predicted baseline and follow-up stimulant and marijuana use.
Results.
Categorical results indicated that relative to DSU, PSU: 1) made riskier decisions after winning feedback; 2) exhibited lower frontal, insular, and striatal BOLD responses to win/loss feedback after making risky decisions; 3) displayed lower thalamic but greater temporo-occipital BOLD responses to risky losses than wins. In comparison, dimensional results indicated that lower BOLD signal to risky than safe choices in frontal, striatal, and additional regions predicted greater marijuana use at follow-up.
Conclusions.
Taken together, blunted frontostriatal signals during risky choices may quantify vulnerability to future marijuana consumption, whereas blunted frontostriatal signals to risky outcomes mark risk for future SUD. These behavioral and neural processing measures may prove useful for identifying ultra-high risk individuals prior to onset of problem drug use.
Introduction.
Recreational stimulant use is a growing concern among young adults, with 4.4% and 5–35% of college students endorsing cocaine and recreational amphetamine (Adderall, Ritalin) use, respectively, and 16% of cocaine experimenters developing dependence within 10 years. To develop cost-effective prevention and intervention strategies, it is crucial to identify ultra-high risk recreational users. However, little is known about biobehavioral markers forecasting trajectory of occasional stimulant use (OSU) to stimulant use disorder (SUD). Previous stimulant use research is predominantly cross-sectional, comparing individuals with chronic stimulant use to healthy individuals; although findings from these studies highlight brain disruptions related to drug use, they cannot disentangle whether disruptions preceded or were a result of chronic use.
Young adulthood is a period of increased independence, often providing more opportunities for risky behavior such as drug experimentation. Risky behavior can be defined as actions that may be subjectively desirable but are potentially harmful and is typically quantified in young adults by their degree of substance use, unprotected sex, health habits, and crime engagement. Risk-taking often occurs in clusters of maladaptive behaviors, suggesting underlying impairments in decision making.
Decision making involves several brain processes including learning, inhibition, and outcome assessment, specifically appraising positive (i.e. safety or reward) or negative (i.e. risk or punishment) valence of choices. Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) research indicates that individuals with SUDs show impaired decision making associated with altered brain activation in executive control and reward processing regions. Decision making is thought to involve a cooperative relationship between an impulsive system activated by immediate rewards and an inhibitory control system. Through learning, the control network allows individuals to resist immediate attraction to rewards in favor of longer-term, advantageous outcomes. In SUD, biobehavioral indices of risk-taking suggest an underlying imbalance between the control and impulsive systems.
The control system integral to decision making comprises prefrontal cortex (PFC), theorized as responsible for learning the relationship between stimuli and outcome, working memory and inhibiting behavior. SUD samples exhibit frontal lobe impairments associated with compromised decision making and increased risk behavior. For example, cocaine abusers exhibit dorsolateral PFC (DLPFC) hypoactivation during response inhibition and prediction of uncertain outcomes; in cocaine dependence, orbitofrontal cortex (OFC) and DLPFC attenuation are linked to reduced ability to differentiate between variable monetary gains. Similarly, methamphetamine users inaccurately process success or failure of available options, a pattern associated with OFC/DLPFC hypoactivation.
Working in conjunction with frontal regions is striatum, an area associated with reward processing, selecting and initiating actions, and learning. During the Iowa Gambling Task (IGT), healthy individuals show stronger striatal activation to wins than losses, but amphetamine dependent individuals demonstrate hypersensitive striatal responses to rewards. Cocaine and methamphetamine users also exhibit striatal hyperactivation but frontal hypoactivation during risky decision making tasks such as the IGT and the Balloon Analogue Risk Task (BART) that is linked to riskier behavioral performance. This suggests that such neural patterns during decision making promotes favoring of risky incentives.
Evidence from functional MRI studies have led researchers to theorize that the frontal lobe and striatum form a functional circuit with insular cortex and anterior cingulate cortex (ACC); these regions coordinate to integrate emotional and autonomic information about rewards into goal-oriented behavior. ACC is proposed to be involved in emotion and behavior management based on its neural connections to both the emotion-processing limbic system and the cognitive control center, PFC. Insula is proposed to play a role in interoceptive processing, wherein individuals integrate physiological cues to differentiate between risky and safe decisions, and transform these cues into conscious feelings and behaviors. ACC and insula hypoactivation is evident in chronic stimulant users during response inhibition and error monitoring during decision making. Evidence for aberrant activity in key components of the PFC-limbic network has led researchers to suggest that weakened ability to accurately process information about options and control behaviors leads to favoring choices that offer immediate, rather than delayed, rewards.
Cross-sectional studies of OSU report decision making impairments that parallel findings in stimulant dependent individuals, including: 1) weakened inhibitory control and reduced cognitive flexibility; 2) neuropsychological impairments in executive functions (e.g. attention, set-shifting); and 3) frontal, striatal, and insular attenuation during a Risky Gains Task (RGT) paired with reduced ability to differentiate between safe and risky decisions.
Several research groups have recognized limitations of cross-sectional addiction research and have shifted towards a longitudinal approach to understand the transition to problematic substance use. Structural MRI studies show that decreased brain volume in: 1) frontocentral regions at age 14 predict binge drinking at age 16; and 2) frontostriatal regions is linked to heightened stimulant use in OSU 1–2 years later. However, functional MRI has been less applied to predict the development of SUD.
The present longitudinal study utilized follow-up clinical and drug use data from OSU (n=144) three years after a fMRI scan to determine whether baseline behavioral and blood oxygen level dependent (BOLD) responses during the RGT: 1) differentiated young adults who became problem stimulant users (PSU; n=35) from those who desisted stimulant use (DSU; n=75) in the three-year interim (categorical approach); and 2) predicted cumulative baseline and follow-up stimulant and marijuana use across OSU, regardless of clinical status (dimensional approach; n=144), to address concerns regarding significant rates of marijuana and stimulant co-use. Analyses compared BOLD activity related to specific task requirements: decision contrasts compared BOLD activity during risk-taking choice trials versus safe choice trials; outcome contrasts compared BOLD activity on trials wherein each subject took a risk and subsequently earned a win or a loss.
Categorical hypotheses were tested based on prior biobehavioral findings in stimulant dependent individuals: 1) PSU would exhibit riskier task performance than DSU; 2) PSU would show greater striatal BOLD signal than DSU to outcomes, particularly in response to risky wins; and 3) PSU would exhibit lower PFC, insular, and cingulate BOLD signal during decision making. As dimensional analyses were exploratory, no apriori hypotheses were tested.
Methods and Materials.
Participants.
The University of California, San Diego Human Subjects Review Board approved the study protocol. Participants were recruited through newspapers, internet ads and fliers mailed to college students. Figure 1 demonstrates participant recruitment and categorical/dimensional data analysis protocol. A total of 1025 individuals were phone-screened and 184 OSU meeting study criteria provided written informed consent to participate. OSU inclusionary criteria were: 1) within the last 6 months, 2+ separate occasions cocaine or prescription amphetamines (e.g. methylphenidate (Adderall), dextroamphetamine (Ritalin) used without a prescribed purpose; 2) no lifetime stimulant dependence; 3) no lifetime stimulant use for medical reasons; and 4) no drug treatment interest. Participants completed three sessions: 1) a baseline diagnostic interview to determine lifetime psychiatric diagnoses and current drug use patterns (n=184); 2) a neuroimaging session completing the RGT (n=161), and 3) a follow-up interview session three years later to determine changes in drug use and clinical diagnoses (n=144). The present study includes data from OSU who completed all three sessions (n=144). No OSU reported using methamphetamines at baseline; all baseline stimulant use was of cocaine and prescription stimulants.
Baseline Session.
Participants were screened for lifetime DSM-IV Axis I diagnoses (including attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), and substance abuse/dependence) and Axis II antisocial personality disorder by the Semi-Structured Assessment for the Genetics of Alcoholism II, and administered the Wechsler Test of Adult Reading, a verbal intelligence measure (IQ). Exclusion criteria is outlined in Stewart et al. and is included as supplemental information. Subjects completed a baseline urine toxicology screen and were excluded if they tested positive for stimulants (thereby avoiding confounding effects from recent use). Testing positive for cannabis was not exclusionary, as its urine presence may last up to 6 weeks.
Risky Gains Task (RGT).
The RGT (illustrated in Figure 2) has been previously described by our experimental group. On each trial, participants were shown the numbers 20, 40, and 80 in increasing order, which represented the number of cents to be added to their total. Participants were informed that 20 was always the “safe option” but that they had the option to wait 1s to receive 40 cents or wait an additional second to receive 80 cents. They were also informed of the potential that 40 or 80 would appear in red font, denoting actual losses of money (-40 or -80) from the total score; 40 and 80 were explicitly called “risky options.”
Unknown to subjects, −40 and −80 outcome frequencies were predefined so that the final gain was identical regardless of whether they selected 20, 40, or 80 cents. That is, there was no actual advantage of selecting risky compared to safe options. Participants were told that a positive value had to be collected via an index finger button press within a subsequent 1s window. A press outside of that timeframe would result in a loss. The 1s length was chosen to allow slow-responding individuals to collect an option. Auditory and visual feedback (“yay”/“You win” for wins and “yuck”/“You lose” for losses) followed each choice. Cumulative total (in dollars) was displayed after trial completion to allow performance monitoring. The task consisted of 96 trials lasting 3.5s each. Three trial types were presented in a pre-set randomized order: 54 rewarded (+20, +40, +80), 24 punished −40, and 18 punished −80 trials. In addition to potential losses due to slow or non-responses on rewarded trials, the RGT design led to each participant receiving a different amount of −40 and −80 trials. If a participant pressed to collect 20 on a trial meant to be a −40 trial, or tried to collect 20 or 40 on a dedicated −80 trial, the subject received the collected amount, therein reducing the number of punished trials.
Image Acquisition.
The scanning session lasted approximately 60m and included an anatomical scan as well as four functional tasks: Stop-Signal, Paper Rock Scissors, two choice prediction, and RGT. Prior to scanner entry, a brief RGT training session was conducted. The RGT was administered as a randomized fast-event related design, time-locked to the onset of 256 whole brain acquisitions (T2*-weighted EPI on a Signa EXCITE, GE Healthcare, Milwaukee, Wisconsin, 3T scanner; TR = 2000 ms, TE = 32ms, FoV = 230x230 mm2, 64x64 matrix, 30 2.6-mm axial slices, 1.4 mm gap, flip angle= 90°, duration: 8m, 32s). Six resting-state trials were intermixed throughout the 96 trials and were not used in analysis. A high-resolution T1-weight image (TR = 8ms, TE =3msec, FoV = 250x250 mm2, 192x256 matrix interpolated to a 256x256 matrix, flip angle= 12°, 172 sagittally acquired slices, .97x.97x1 mm3 voxels) was also obtained as a reference.
Three Year Follow-Up Interview.
OSU participated in another standardized interview three years after their baseline sessions (Figure 1), by phone or in-person, to assess drug use severity in the interim period. Analyses were conducted using both categorical and dimensional definitions of interim stimulant use as recommended by Rabin and Moeller. For categorical analyses, participants were grouped into two categories: PSU or DSU. PSU (n=35) were a priori defined based on the current DSM-V criteria for SUD: 1) continued stimulant use since baseline; and 2) endorsement of 2+ DSM-IV symptoms of stimulant abuse or dependence occurring together for 6+ consecutive interim months. Within PSU, 51% met criteria for cocaine abuse, 23% met criteria for cocaine dependence, 46% met criteria for amphetamine abuse and 17% met criteria for amphetamine dependence. DSU (n=75) were defined based on the emphasis of the choice to desist as a critical part of addiction recovery models and in the prevention of transition to SUD: 1) no 6-month periods of 3+ stimulant uses; and 2) no endorsement of interim SUD symptoms. OSU who did not meet criteria for either PSU or DSU (n=34) were excluded from categorical analyses because of the highly variable nature of those who did not fit either category (e.g. met only 1 abuse/dependence criteria, used too many times in interim but no accompanying symptoms, etc.).Dimensional analyses were conducted using all OSU (n=144), wherein RGT BOLD signals were correlated with baseline and interim stimulant and marijuana uses (quantified as total sessions).
Data Analysis.
Baseline Characteristics and Behavior.
Group differences in age, IQ, education, drug use, and RGT behavior were compared in SPSS by independent samples t-tests, whereas differences in gender, race/ethnicity, and handedness were analyzed using chi-square tests (Table 1). To evaluate whether follow-up status differed as a function of baseline preferred stimulant type (cocaine versus prescription amphetamines) or in relation to the history of/presence of comorbid alcohol and marijuana abuse or dependence, chi-square analyses were performed.
RGT.
The RGT was analyzed in two stages. First, decision contrasts evaluated differences between groups when individuals made a “risky” (+/− 40; +/−80) versus “safe” (+20) decision. All risky responses were combined to create a relatively even split between risky and safe decisions. Second, outcome contrasts evaluated differences in response after wins (+40; +80) versus losses (−40; −80) on risky trials; participants without 5 of each trial type (safe versus risky (40 or 80)) were excluded from analysis.
Neuroimaging.
MRI data were analyzed using Analysis of Functional Neuroimages (AFNI). Single subject data preprocessing procedures are outlined in Reske et al.. Multiple regressor analysis and individual linear contrasts were computed in 3dDeconvolve, including six motion regressors as well as baseline and linear drift. Deconvolution was performed to examine the decision contrast (risky = +/−40, +/−80; safe = +20) and outcome contrast (risky wins = +40, +80; risky losses = −40, −80). Voxels were resampled into 4×4×4-mm3 space and whole-brain voxel-wise normalized percent signal change, the main dependent measure, was determined by dividing the beta coefficient for each of the predictors of interest (BOLD signal for risky versus safe decisions and risky wins versus risky losses) by the beta coefficient for the baseline regressor and multiplying by 100. A Gaussian spatial filter (4 mm full-width half-maximum; FWHM) blurred percent signal change values, which were then normalized to AFNI Talairach coordinates (40×48×38 voxel coverage). Individual-subject values for risky decisions, safe decisions, risky win outcomes, and risky loss outcomes for each voxel included in a whole-brain mask were extracted for statistical analyses. Individual voxels meeting a p< 0.01 significance criterion as a result of statistical tests outlined below were evaluated further to determine whether they comprised a significant brain cluster after correction for multiple comparisons.
Categorical analyses.
For each voxel, a linear mixed effects (LME) model was performed in R to identify significant regions of percent signal change between PSU and DSU, for decision and outcome analyses separately. Group was the between-subjects variable and subject was a random variable. Within-subject variables were decision type (risky versus safe) and outcome type (risky wins versus risky losses). Cohen’s d was calculated to determine effect sizes.
Dimensional analyses.
Multiple regressions were computed for each brain voxel, with two separate dependent variables: 1) percent signal change for risky minus safe decisions; and 2) percent signal change for risky wins minus losses. Predictors in each regression were the following: 1) baseline stimulant uses; 2) interim stimulant uses; 3) baseline marijuana uses; and 4) interim marijuana uses. All predictors were log-transformed due to non-normality and z-scored prior to regression entry.
Extracting significant whole-brain clusters.
Neuroimaging analysis software has been criticized for underestimating spatial autocorrelation, leading to insufficient multiple comparison corrections. In response to these concerns: 1) the updated 3dFWHMx program was employed to more reliably estimate true autocorrelation and smoothness present following blurring (5 mm); and 2) an updated version of 3dClustSim was run to account for autocorrelation given our voxel/whole-brain mask size, 10,000 Monte Carlo simulations and two-sided thresholding with an overall voxel p statistical threshold of 0.01 and a corrected clusterwise alpha value of 0.01. Data smoothness was approximately 6 mm and > 19 neighboring voxels (or > 1216 μL) comprised a significant brain cluster.