Title.
Evolutionary modifications in human brain connectivity associated with schizophrenia.
Abstract.
See Vértes and Seidlitz (doi:) for a scientific commentary on this article.
Is schizophrenia a by-product of human brain evolution? By comparing the human and chimpanzee connectomes, van den Heuvel et al. demonstrate that connections unique to the human brain show greater involvement in schizophrenia pathology. Modifications in service of higher-order brain functions may have rendered the brain more vulnerable to dysfunction.
Abstract.
The genetic basis and human-specific character of schizophrenia has led to the hypothesis that human brain evolution may have played a role in the development of the disorder. We examined schizophrenia-related changes in brain connectivity in the context of evolutionary changes in human brain wiring by comparing in vivo neuroimaging data from humans and chimpanzees, one of our closest living evolutionary relatives and a species with which we share a very recent common ancestor. We contrasted the connectome layout between the chimpanzee and human brain and compared differences with the pattern of schizophrenia-related changes in brain connectivity as observed in patients. We show evidence of evolutionary modifications of human brain connectivity to significantly overlap with the cortical pattern of schizophrenia-related dysconnectivity (P < 0.001, permutation testing). We validated these effects in three additional, independent schizophrenia datasets. We further assessed the specificity of effects by examining brain dysconnectivity patterns in seven other psychiatric and neurological brain disorders (including, among others, major depressive disorder and obsessive-compulsive disorder, arguably characterized by behavioural symptoms that are less specific to humans), which showed no such associations with modifications of human brain connectivity. Comparisons of brain connectivity across humans, chimpanzee and macaques further suggest that features of connectivity that evolved in the human lineage showed the strongest association to the disorder, that is, brain circuits potentially related to human evolutionary specializations. Taken together, our findings suggest that human-specific features of connectome organization may be enriched for changes in brain connectivity related to schizophrenia. Modifications in human brain connectivity in service of higher order brain functions may have potentially also rendered the brain vulnerable to brain dysfunction.
Introduction.
Schizophrenia is a neuropsychiatric disorder that is characterized by hallucinations, delusions, loss of initiative and general cognitive dysfunction. Its human-specific character and its genetic origin, coupled with its similar prevalence across societies varying in climate, level of urbanization, culture, industrialization etc., led to the early hypothesis that human brain evolution may have played a role in vulnerability to the disorder.
The early theories of an evolutionary origin of psychosis were motivated by the observations of enhanced cerebral asymmetry in humans compared to other primates combined with observations of reduced corpus callosum connectivity and asymmetrical changes of ventricular size in patients with schizophrenia. It was particularly hypothesized that schizophrenia may be related to the evolution of cognitive functions and complex social cognition and accompanying development of inter-regional neural connectivity in hominins, rendering the brain vulnerable to alterations within these brain circuits. Emerging evidence from modern-day studies of the network structure of the human brain—the human connectome—have suggested that schizophrenia may involve a disruption of the brain’s large-scale connectivity architecture (; for a review see). This collectively leads to the question of whether evolutionary modifications in the human connectome played a role in the vulnerability and emergence of cerebral dysconnectivity associated with schizophrenia.
One approach to investigating the evolution of human brain connectivity and its potential relationship to psychiatric traits is to compare human brain organization with that of other living primate species, especially with our closest living primate relative, the chimpanzee. Our two species shared a last common African ancestor from about 7–8 million years ago, making chimpanzees an ideal group to study human brain evolution. Larger brain size across primates is associated with reduced interhemispheric and increased intrahemispheric connectivity, with encephalization argued to lead to an increasing dependence of brain function on the effectiveness of evolutionarily new connectivity. Human-specific modifications in brain wiring of the connectome may thus support increasing efficiency of global brain network communication of multimodal association regions, arguably in service of development of more complex cognitive brain functions in humans.
This selection pressure for effective information transfer between remote brain regions may have been paralleled by an increasing risk of disruption in these circuits and the cognitive brain functions they support. Modifications in human brain connectivity may as such have played a role in a higher risk of emergence of human-unique brain disorders like schizophrenia. We used the framework of comparative connectomics —the field that studies commonalities and differences in the topological organization of brain circuits across species—to evaluate the proposed role of brain connectivity evolution in the hominid group in the context of vulnerability for schizophrenia. We compare human and chimpanzee brain network organization and provide evidence that the pattern of schizophrenia brain dysconnectivity overlaps with recent evolutionary changes to human brain connectivity.
Materials and methods.
Subjects and data acquisition.
Principal schizophrenia dataset.
MRI data of the principal schizophrenia dataset included the examination of 3 T T1 and diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) data of 48 patients with schizophrenia and 43 age- and gender-matched healthy control subjects (demographics listed in Supplementary Table 2 and). All participants provided informed consent as approved by the local medical ethics committee for research in humans (METC), with procedures carried out according to the directives of the Declaration of Helsinki (amendment of Edinburgh, 2000). MRI data were acquired on a clinical Philips MRI scanner and included the acquisition of a T1 scan and a DWI scan (Supplementary material).
Schizophrenia validation datasets.
Effects were validated in two additional, independent schizophrenia validation datasets (datasets acquired on 3 T scanner with the same imaging protocol as the principal dataset), including 40 patients and 37 healthy controls and 30 patients and 33 healthy controls, respectively (Supplementary Table 3).
Other disorders.
To examine specificity in brain connectivity effects to schizophrenia, we additionally included T1 and DWI data of seven other brain conditions (all in their own way related to changes to white matter connectivity), including major depressive disorder (MDD, patients/matched controls n = 211/476), obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD, n = 36/42), bipolar disorder (n = 147/477), autism spectrum disorder (ASD, n = 73/64, ABIDE dataset), behavioural variant frontotemporal dementia (bvFTD, n = 20/20), Alzheimer’s disease (n = 20/20) and mild cognitive impairment (MCI, n = 28/28). Details on these datasets are provided in the Supplementary material and Supplementary Tables 6 and 7 and. To validate that observed schizophrenia effects were independent of acquisition method, a fourth dataset of patients with schizophrenia was included by means of the open SchizoConnect COBRE dataset (SCZcobre, n = 65/75).
Primates and human dataset.
T1 and DWI from 22 adult chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes, 29.4 ± 12.8 years) and 58 adult age-matched human subjects were included (Homo sapiens, 42.5 ± 9.8 years) (Supplementary material). No new chimpanzee MRI data were acquired for this study. All chimpanzee MRIs were obtained from a data archive of scans obtained prior to the 2015 implementation of US Fish and Wildlife Service and National Institutes of Health regulations governing research with chimpanzees, with all chimpanzee scans completed by the end of 2012. Data are archived in the National Chimpanzee Brain Resource (https://www.chimpanzeebrain.org). T1 and DWI data of eight rhesus macaques (Macaca mulatta, 14 ± 6.7 years) were included as an outgroup. MRI data were acquired on Siemens 3 T Trio Tim Scanners and included the acquisition of a structural T1 scan and a diffusion MRI scan.
Macroscale diffusion-weighted imaging connectome construction.
For each subject, the T1 image was processed using FreeSurfer, followed by parcellation of the cortex using a 114-area subdivision of the Desikan-Killiany atlas (DK-114) of cortical structures (Supplementary material). Deterministic fibre tracking was used to reconstruct cortico-cortical connections, with the cortico-cortical connectivity matrix reconstructed by determining for each pair of cortical regions whether the two regions were interconnected by DWI streamlines [see Supplementary material for details of preprocessing and fibre tracking, including robustness analyses validating effects of movement, group-consensus masking, fibre thresholding, fibre length and validation by means of the high-resolution data from the Human Connectome Project ]. We used fractional anisotropy as a metric of connectivity strength of reconstructed connections, a metric often suggested to relate to tract integrity and myelination levels and often used to examine case-control differences in connectivity strength. Fractional anisotropy weights were resampled in the comparative dataset to a Gaussian distribution (mean = 0.5, standard deviation = 0.15) to allow for cross-species comparison and to rule out global differences (Supplementary material). Analysis of number of streamlines and volume-normalized streamline density as an alternative metric of connectivity strength did not show overlap with patient effects, so we further focused on fractional anisotropy in our analysis.
Brain dysconnectivity.
Schizophrenia brain dysconnectivity was assessed by performing edgewise comparison of the reconstructed connections between patient and control connectome maps. Between-group difference was taken as the t-statistic of a two-sample t-test comparison between edgewise fractional anisotropy values of the patients and control subjects, with higher t-statistics indicating greater dysconnectivity in schizophrenia patients (Supplementary material). Dysconnectivity maps for the other disorder datasets were derived using the same procedure.
Human modifications to brain connectivity.
Human-specific connections.
Human-specific connections were selected as the set of connections that were observed in ≥60% of the human subjects and in none of the chimpanzee connectome maps (i.e. 0% of the chimpanzee subjects). We used this strict prevalence group threshold of 60% (human) and exclusion threshold of 0% (chimpanzee) to reduce the inclusion of false-positive reconstructions at the group level and to include a conservative definition of human-specific tracts (Supplementary material). We use the term ‘human-specific’ for these connections, but we note that with this term, we are not directly implying that humans are necessarily the only primate species to possess these connections. Human-chimpanzee-shared connections were selected as the subset of cortico-cortical connections that were consistently observed in both species (≥60% of humans and ≥60% of chimpanzees). Results were verified using other threshold settings (Supplementary material). For the class of shared connections, the level of species difference was computed as the between-group t-statistic between the normalized fractional anisotropy values of the constructed connections of the group of chimpanzees and the group of humans (Supplementary material).
Validation chimpanzee-human homologous BB38.
We opted for the use of the Desikan-Killiany brain atlas to be in line with previous connectome studies of brain disorders, including those in schizophrenia. However, the Desikan-Killiany atlas is designed to map the gyri and sulci patterning of the human cortical mantle and a disadvantage of using this atlas in a human-primate neuroimaging study is thus that it does not necessarily describe homologous cytoarchitectonic regions across the two species. We therefore validated our findings using data from the von Bonin and Bailey (BB38) cortical atlas designed to map homologous regions across humans and chimpanzees. This atlas describes 38 homologous cortical areas per hemisphere across humans and chimpanzees based on cytoarchitectonic similarity of cortical areas (Supplementary material and Supplementary Fig. 3).
Data availability.
Chimpanzee MRIs are archived in the National Chimpanzee Brain Resource (data available at https://www.chimpanzeebrain.org). Species connectivity matrices are available at the USC Multimodal Connectivity Database (UMCD), http://umcd.humanconnectomeproject.org (ID 3036, 3037, 3038, 3039). Healthy human connectome data from the Human Connectome Project are available through the Human Connectome Project data portal (https://www.humanconnectome.org). Patient dysconnectivity maps are available on reasonable request to the corresponding author.