Title.
Brain function, structure and genomic data are linked but show different sensitivity to duration of illness and disease stage in schizophrenia.
Abstract.
The progress of schizophrenia at various stages is an intriguing question, which has been explored to some degree using single-modality brain imaging data, e.g. gray matter (GM) or functional connectivity (FC). However it remains unclear how those changes from different modalities are correlated with each other and if the sensitivity to duration of illness and disease stages across modalities is different. In this work, we jointly analyzed FC, GM volume and single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) data of 159 individuals including healthy controls (HC), drug-naïve first-episode schizophrenia (FESZ) and chronic schizophrenia patients (CSZ), aiming to evaluate the links among SNP, FC and GM patterns, and their sensitivity to duration of illness and disease stages in schizophrenia. Our results suggested: 1) both GM and FC highlighted impairments in hippocampal, temporal gyrus and cerebellum in schizophrenia, which were significantly correlated with genes like SATB2, GABBR2, PDE4B, CACNA1C etc. 2) GM and FC presented gradually decrease trend (HC > FESZ>CSZ), while SNP indicated a non-gradual variation trend with un-significant group difference observed between FESZ and CSZ; 3) Group difference between HC and FESZ of FC was more remarkable than GM, and FC presented a stronger negative correlation with duration of illness than GM (p = 0.0006). Collectively, these results highlight the benefit of leveraging multimodal data and provide additional clues regarding the impact of mental illness at various disease stages.
Highlights.
Investigation of linked SNP, GM and FC pattern through parallel ICA method;
SNP indicated a non-gradual variation trend, highlighted genes like GABBR2 etc.;
GM and FC exhibited greater deficits at late disease stages (HC > FESZ>CSZ);
FC presented a stronger negative correlation with duration of illness than GM.
Introduction.
Schizophrenia (SZ) is a severe mental illness with high heritability, as well as structural and functional brain impairments. Genome wide association studies (GWAS) from Psychiatric Genomics Consortium (PGC) have announced landmark findings, which highlighted a list of susceptible loci. The disease-related abnormalities in brain regions were also demonstrated by many previous studies. For instance, gray matter (GM) volumes of the temporal and prefrontal gyrus were largely reported to be impaired. Functional connectivity (FC) computed from functional magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) data, which measures interregional temporal correlations of blood oxygenation level-dependent (BOLD) signal fluctuations, has been reported disabilities involving a number of brain regions, including the frontal lobe, sensory-motor areas, limbic structures and temporal gyrus.
As different modalities may be related to each other constituting complementary observations of the same phenomenon, many multimodal methods have been developed and applied into analysis of mental disease. For example, Sui et al. developed a multimodal canonical correlation analysis plus joint independent component analysis (mCCA+jICA) method to reveal that GM density abnormalities in default model network (DMN) were related to white-matter impairments in anterior thalamic radiation in schizophrenia. Chen et al. used a parallel independent component analysis (para-ICA) method to reveal that higher activation in precentral and postcentral gyri was observed in SZ with higher loadings of the linked SNP component. Nervertheless, there are few studies combining structural, functional and genomic data to analyze schizophrenia.
Moreover, it's still not clear whether there are progressive changes in each modality and the time at which for changes in different modalities are first evident. Previous studies have explored the progressive changes primarily based on single modality. For example, the progressive decreases of GM volumes were pronounced mainy in the temporal and prefrontal gyrus, while increase in the lateral ventricle. Another recent study consisting of 39 medication naïve, first-episode schizophrenia and 31 matched controls revealed that first-episode patients presented reduced global efficiency and decreased regional nodal efficiency in hippocampal and precuneus. Li et al. demonstrated that 90% of the FC changes during the first-episode stage of SZ were centered on the inferior frontal gyrus, while more thalamus-related connectivity were extended to show FC differences in chronic SZ patients. However, the direct comparison of progressive impairments among different modalities are not largely explored. Based on the linked SNP-FC-GM pattern identified from the multimodal fusion method, we can further compare the modality-specific sensitivity to the disease progression.
Overall, in this study, we performed a multimodal analysis of first-episode SZ patients (FESZ), chronic SZ patients (CSZ) and healthy controls (HC) with three features, i.e., GM volume, FC and single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP), aiming to evaluate the links among the three modalities, and their association with duration of illness (DOI) and disease stages. Note that we preselected SNPs from PGC's SCZ2 database based on the p-value, while these SNPs are not functionally homogeneous. Since our recent study has proved that no reliable SNP-imaging association was noted in the polygenic risk score (PGRS) analyses when calculating PGRS on SNPs with high heterogeneity. The multimodal data-driven method would slove this by computing subgroups of all SNPs first and then inverstigate the associated structural and functional brain impairments based on the subgroups. These subgroup SNPs are more likely to converge within brain regions. We hypothesized that a significant correlated SNP-FC-GM pattern would be revealed, as well as significant group differences among HC, FESZ and CSZ in each modality. More importantly, different sensitivity to DOI and disease stages (i.e., the order of feature impairment) would be revealed for different modalities, which may provide us additional clues regarding the impact of mental illness at various disease stages.
Materials and methods.
Participants.
159 subjects were recruited from Wuxi Mental Health Center, consisting of eighty-seven HC, twenty drug-naïve FESZs and fifty-two CSZs. Table 1 describes the demographic information of the data. Patients who have DOI ≤ 2 years were definded as FESZ patients (0.96 ± 0.85), others were identified as chronic patients (20.63 ± 9.84). Subjects were excluded if they had any current or past neurological illness, substance abuse or head injury resulting in loss of consciousness. All the patients were diagnosed according to the DSM-IV diagnostic criteria by at least two qualified psychiatrists.
Data collection.
All subjects were scanned by structural MRI and resting-state functional MRI on a 3.0-Tesla Magnetom TIM Trio (Siemens Medical System) at the Department of Medical Imaging, Wuxi People's Hospital, Nanjing Medical University. Foam pads were used to reduce head motion and scanner noise. Prior to the scan, the subjects were instructed to keep their eyes closed, relax but not fall asleep, and move as little as possible during data acquisition. fMRI: Resting-state scans were acquired using a single-shot gradient-echo echo-planar-imaging sequence as with the following parameters: TR = 2000 ms, TE = 30 ms, flip angle = 90°, matrix size = 64 × 64, FOV = 220 × 220 mm2, 33 axial slices, slice thickness = 4 mm, acquisition voxel size = 3.4 × 3.4 × 4 mm3, resulting in 240 volumes. sMRI: Three-dimensional T1-weighted images were acquired by employing a 3D-MPRAGE sequence as with the following parameters: time repetition (TR) = 2530 ms, time echo (TE) = 3.44 ms, flip angle = 7°, matrix size = 256 × 256, field of view (FOV) = 256 × 256 mm2, 192 sagittal slices, slice thickness = 1 mm, acquisition voxel size = 1 × 1 × 1 mm3, total acquisition time = 649 s.
All participants provided blood samples for genetic analysis. Genomic deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) was extracted according to the standard protocol by protease K digestion, phenol-chloroform extraction and ethanol precipitation. Afterwards, whole-genome genotyping was conducted on 571,054 loci using Illumina human PsychArray-24.
Data preprocessing.
The structural MRI data and functional MRI data were preprocessed using the SPM8 (www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm/software/spm8) voxel based morphometry module and the Brant software (http://brant.brainnetome.org/en/latest/,), respectively (see supplementary file for more details). A mask for the preprocessed structural data was then generated to include voxels with a mean value larger than 0.2 across all the subjects. Based on the 116 × 116 automatic anatomical labelling (AAL) atlas, FC network was constructed upon computing pearson correlation of averaged BOLD signals between all pairs of regions, resulting in 6786 edges. The genetic data were preprocessed using PLINK following the quality control procedures in and further overlaped with PGC's SCZ2 database (p < 0.01), resulting in 4937 SNPs (see supplementary file). Discrete numbers were assigned to the categorical genotypes: 0 for no minor allele, 1 for one minor allele, and 2 for two minor alleles.
Accordingly, the three feature matrices included: FC (subjects by voxels: 159 × 6786), GM (subjects by voxels: 159 × 77,122) and SNPs (subjects by alleles:159 × 4937). The feature matrices were then normalized to ensure that all modalities had the same average sum-of-squares (computed across all subjects and all voxels/SNPs for each modality). Medication information (chlorpromazine equivalent) was regressed out for the chronic patients prior to additional analyses.
Data analysis.
Three-way para-ICA.
We firstly applied three-way para-ICA to identify a linked SNP-FC-GM pattern as shown in Fig. 1. Three-way para-ICA is a multivariate association analysis method that estimates maximally independent components within each modality using Infomax ICA separately and maximizes the sum of pair-wise correlations between modalities (Method details are provided in the supplementary file). The code is open through the Fusion ICA Toolbox (FIT, http://mialab.mrn.org/software/fit). The number of components was measured to be 14 for FC and GM modalitites through a modified minimum description length (MDL) criterion, an efficient method as discussed in previous ICA associated studies. A consistency-based method was used to identify number of components for the SNP modality, which ran ICA decompositions across a range of numbers of components and determined the comoponent number with the most reliable results (in our case the final model order was estimated to be 6).
Correlation and group difference analysis.
Cross correlations among the loading parameters of the three modalities were assessed, and the significant levels were adjusted using Bonferroni correction for multiple comparison. To measure the consistency of the identified joint pattern across participants, we applied a ten-fold cross validation method to replicate the associations. Moreover, in order to evaluate the stability of the linked SNP-FC-GM pattern, we conducted 1000 permutation tests to investigate the possibility of overfitting. Particularly, we randomly permuted subjects of all the three modalities and ran three-way para-ICA again on the permuted subjects. Then we extracted the top correlated SNP-FC-GM pair in each of the 1000 permutation tests and calculated the tail probability to evaluate the significance level of the identified SNP-FC-GM association. Finally, the sptial maps of the SNP-FC-SNP pattern were transformed to Z scores and the top contributing brain regions, FC and SNPs were selected and plotted.
Sensitivity to disease stages and DOI.
To investigate the different sensitivities to diease stages and DOI, we applied analysis of variance (ANOVA) analysis and two sample t-test to measure the group difference across different disease stages within each modality for the linked SNP-FC-GM pattern (Fig. 1). Then we calculated the relationship between the identified imaging modalities and DOI, and used Z value to compare the difference between slopes of the two modalities. Specifically, we first applied generalized linear regression (GLM) model to identify a regression line for the relationship between imaging modalitites and DOI. Then the slope of the regression line was the corresponding beta value of the loading parameter of each modality (kGM for the GM modality and kFC for the FC modality). Z value was computed as the difference between the two slopes divided by the standard error of the difference between the slopes. As the GLM model gave us the standard error of each slope (stand_kGM for the GM modality and stand_kFC for the FC modality), then the standard error of the difference between the two slopes can be computed as . Then we calculated the Z value as Eq. (1):
Afterwards, we computed the two-tailed p-value corresponding to the Z value to evaluate the significance of the two slopes.
Genetic pathway analysis.
After converting the spatial map of the SNP component to Z scores, the high-ranking SNPs (|Z| > 2) were annotated to genes. To further interpret the relationship between the SNP component and schizophrenia, we fed these top contributing genes to the WebGestalt software for Gene Ontology (GO) analysis, which used a hypergenometrix test to detect overrepresentation of the genes among the whole genome in a GO category.