Title.
Multi-echo fMRI, resting-state connectivity, and high psychometric schizotypy.
Abstract.
Disrupted striatal functional connectivity is proposed to play a critical role in the development of psychotic symptoms. Previous resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging (rs-fMRI) studies typically reported disrupted striatal connectivity in patients with psychosis and in individuals at clinical and genetic high risk of the disorder relative to healthy controls. This has not been widely studied in healthy individuals with subclinical psychotic-like experiences (schizotypy). Here we applied the emerging technology of multi-echo rs-fMRI to examine corticostriatal connectivity in this group, which is thought to drastically maximize physiological noise removal and increase BOLD contrast-to-noise ratio. Multi-echo rs-fMRI data (echo times, 12, 28, 44, 60 ms) were acquired from healthy individuals with low (LS, n = 20) and high (HS, n = 19) positive schizotypy as determined with the Oxford-Liverpool Inventory of Feelings and Experiences (O-LIFE). After preprocessing to ensure optimal contrast and removal of non-BOLD signal components, whole-brain functional connectivity from six striatal seeds was compared between the HS and LS groups. Effects were considered significant at cluster-level p < .05 family-wise error correction. Compared to LS, HS subjects showed lower rs-fMRI connectivity between ventromedial prefrontal regions and ventral striatal regions. Lower connectivity was also observed between the dorsal putamen and the hippocampus, occipital regions, as well as the cerebellum. These results demonstrate that subclinical positive psychotic-like experiences in healthy individuals are associated with striatal hypoconnectivity as detected using multi-echo rs-fMRI. Further application of this approach may aid in characterizing functional connectivity abnormalities across the extended psychosis phenotype.
Highlights.
Multi-echo fMRI was used to investigate resting-state connectivity in subjects with low and high psychometric schizotypy (HS).
High schizotypy subjects showed hypoconnectivity between ventral striatum and ventromedial prefrontal cortex.
These subjects also showed hypoconnectivity between dorsal striatum and temporooccipital regions.
Introduction.
Over the last two decades, the dysconnection hypothesis of schizophrenia has gained growing neurobiological support due to technical advances in structural and functional magnetic resonance imaging. The dysconnection hypothesis suggests that the hallmark symptoms of schizophrenia arise from abnormal functional integration between distributed brain regions due to altered neuromodulation of synaptic plasticity, particularly in regions with dopaminergic afferents. A key area is the striatum, which receives prominent innervations from dopaminergic neurons in the midbrain, and is central to the orchestration of activity of limbic, associative and motor brain regions through interconnected cortico-striatal loops, thereby supporting a range of neural computations necessary for normal cognitive function. Striatal dysregulation may therefore be involved in widespread disruption of these circuits and the emergence of positive symptoms. Indeed, a number of studies in patients with schizophrenia and individuals at clinical high risk (CHR) of psychosis reported increased presynaptic dopamine synthesis capacity and release in the striatum (see for a meta-analysis), and a direct correlation between the extent of striatal dysfunction and the severity of positive psychotic symptoms in patients. Moreover, there is evidence to suggest that positive symptoms may be associated with disrupted task-related striatal activation and connectivity during the attribution of aberrant salience to otherwise irrelevant stimuli in healthy individuals, CHR subjects, and patients with a full-blown psychotic disorder. Such evidence aligns well with predictions based on animal models of psychosis which show that striatal dysfunction may result from increased hippocampal activity, which may in turn be related to prefrontal cortex (PFC) abnormalities, and propose that disrupted interactions within this corticostriatal circuit contribute to the development of aberrant salience processing and positive symptoms.
In this context, resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging (rs-fMRI) provides a powerful tool to examine patterns of altered functional connectivity and their relationship to symptomatology in patients with established psychosis as well as in individuals at genetic or CHR of psychosis (e.g.). rs-fMRI studies focusing on striatal connectivity in patients with schizophrenia and in their relatives have reported altered functional integration of this region with a number of cortical areas, including mainly the prefrontal and temporal cortices. Dimensional views of psychosis postulate that there is continuity between subclinical psychotic-like experiences which can be detected in healthy people using validated self-report questionnaires (that is, schizotypy) and psychotic symptoms in patients with schizophrenia. Consistent with this psychosis continuum view, a recent rs-fMRI study reported that scores on the positive dimension of schizotypy (relating to cognitive-perceptual experiences) were positively associated with ventral striatal–PFC connectivity, and negatively associated with dorsal striatal–posterior cingulate connectivity. Similarly, another recent study by Rössler and colleagues reported ventral striatal dysconnectivity in a schizotypy sample and provided preliminary evidence that this might indeed result from dopaminergic alterations, supporting the dysconnection hypothesis. In particular, the authors found lower ventral striatal connectivity in participants who scored higher on a schizotypy scale regardless of whether they had received an L-Dopa or placebo challenge, whereas participants with lower schizotypy scores showed striatal dysconnectivity following L-Dopa administration. However, the samples used in both studies above were largely composed of individuals with scores in the low to moderate range. It thus remains unclear whether corticostriatal dysconnectivity extends to individuals with high positive schizotypy scores. This is an important question as previous studies in schizophrenia and CHR subjects indicate that the greater the rs-fMRI dysconnectivity, the higher the severity of positive symptoms, and that high scores in positive schizotypy scales are associated with higher severity of positive symptoms in patients with schizophrenia.
The high schizotypy paradigm is a widely used strategy to examine neurobiological factors related to the expression of psychotic symptoms in the absence of possibly confounding disease-related effects such as antipsychotic medication exposure and illness chronicity which can affect rs-fMRI data (, 2015). However, additional confounders in imaging studies may arise from technical limitations, as for example, rs-fMRI data tends to be noisy and may result in indeterminacy of the sources of blood oxygenation level dependent (BOLD) signals, particularly within subcortical regions. Previous studies in psychosis and schizotypy used standard rs-fMRI, which is based on single-echo echo-planar imaging (EPI) sequences employing echo times (TEs) designed to roughly correspond to the average tissue T2*, in order to optimize contrast. However, because T2* varies regionally, so does the signal-to-contrast ratio, resulting in signal loss in parts of the brain where T2* is particularly short or long (e.g.). This compromises the quality of the data, especially in low T2* regions such as the inferior temporal cortices, or indeed the orbitofrontal cortex and ventral striatum. Adding to this issue, rs-fMRI connectivity findings are highly vulnerable to spurious effects: because they are often based on correlational analyses, any factor that simultaneously influences signal in more than one region of the brain will increase observed connectivity, while factors that influence signal in a single region will decrease observed connectivity, such as head motion, cardiac and respiratory rates, arterial CO₂ concentration and blood pressure (see e.g. for a detailed discussion). Typically, this type of so called physiological noise is dealt with using band-pass-filtering for the BOLD signal frequency band (0.01 Hz–0.08 Hz) and removal of the variance explained by separately acquired physiological nuisance recordings using linear regression. However, significant noise remains even after data clean-up, and nuisance variation that has not been modelled will inevitably remain. These limitations can be addressed by using an fMRI sequence that collects multiple echoes after each pulse. Firstly, the collection of multiple echoes allows for the relaxometric estimation of region specific T2* values, and hence for the voxel-wise computation of a contrast optimized signal from appropriately weighted echoes, which drastically improves overall contrast-to-noise ratio. Secondly, the collection of multiple echoes allows for blind separation of BOLD-like from non-BOLD-like signal components: while the observed percent signal change ΔS always depends on both changes in the initial signal intensity (S0) and changes in T2*, BOLD effects modulate T2* much more than S0, and non-BOLD effects (e.g. head motion, cerebrovascular pulsatility, hardware related fluctuation etc.) modulate S0 much more than T2*. Since T2* scales linearly with TE but S0 does not, regression of signal components identified using independent component analysis against TE and S0 can be used to differentiate between BOLD- and non-BOLD-like components. Thus, nuisance contributions can be reliably removed even if their source is unknown.
To date, these technical limitations have not been addressed in investigations of rs-fMRI connectivity in the psychosis spectrum. Hence, this study sought to investigate rs-fMRI corticostriatal connectivity in a sample of healthy adults with high scores on a psychometric measure of positive schizotypy using contrast-optimized, and independent components analysis (ICA)-denoised, multi-echo (ME) EPI data. Based on findings implicating corticostriatal dysconnectivity in the emergence of positive psychotic symptoms, we hypothesized that individuals with high positive schizotypy (HS) would show altered corticostriatal functional connectivity compared to a group of similar individuals with low positive schizotypy (LS) scores as control group.
Methods and materials.
Participants.
Two hundred and fifty potential participants who had responded to online advertising via the Research Volunteer Recruitment Webpage of King's College London were pre-screened using the short version of the Oxford-Liverpool Inventory of Feelings and Experiences (O-LIFE). Subjects were invited to participate in the study if they scored <2 (low positive schizotypy, LS) or >7 (high positive schizotypy, HS) on the Unusual Experiences subscale of the O-LIFE, as in a previous imaging study in our center. The UE subscale of the O-LIFE questionnaire reflects positive schizotypy and is associated with positive symptoms in schizophrenia patients.
Participants were excluded if they had a history of neurologic/psychiatric disorders as assessed using the Mini International Neuropsychiatric Inventory and the Psychosis Screening Questionnaire (administered by a trained interviewer and reviewed by an experienced neuropsychologist, GM). Other exclusion criteria included contraindications to MRI scanning, having a first-degree relative with present/past history of psychotic disorder, present/past history of use of psychotropic medications, and use of recreational drugs in the two weeks prior to scanning or meeting criteria for substance abuse/dependence by self-report. The final sample included 20 participants in both the HS (10 males; age range 18–39 years, M = 26.35, SD = 5.47) and LS groups (11 males; age range 18–44 years, M = 26.70, SD = 7.06). Three studies have reported previous findings from overlapping sub-samples of this cohort with other imaging modalities.
Ethical approval for the study was obtained from the KCL College Research Ethics Committee (CREC) and all participants provided written informed consent before initiating any study procedures.
Behavioral assessments.
On the day of scanning, before scanning commenced, participants completed a semi-structured interview adapted from the Early Psychosis Prevention and Intervention Centre (EPPIC) Drug and Alcohol Assessment Schedule (http://www.eppic.org.au) to assess current/past medication use and current/past use of alcohol, tobacco and cannabis; the Social Function Questionnaire (SFQ) to measure social functioning; and a validated short version of the Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale-III (WAIS- III) to measure intellectual ability. Analysis of demographic and questionnaire data was performed in SPSS 24 (https://www.ibm.com/analytics/us/en/technology/spss/), with the effect of group being tested using independent sample t-tests for parametric data and χ2-tests for non-parametric data (significance threshold p < .05).
Imaging acquisition.
Scanning was performed on a General Electric Discovery MR750 3 T system (Milwaukee, WI, USA) at the Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology & Neuroscience, King's College London. For the rs-fMRI, participants were asked to lie still with their eyes open, and to think of nothing in particular while a fixation cross was displayed in the center of a screen which they viewed through a mirror system. Scanning time for the rs-fMRI was 12 min. During this time, ME-EPI images sensitive to BOLD contrast were acquired to measure hemodynamic responses (repetition time: 2500 ms; echo times, 12, 28, 44, 60 ms; flip angle, 80°; 4.0 × 4.0 × 3.0-mm voxels; field of view, 240; 32 axial sections collected with sequential (top down) acquisition and 1-mm interslice gap). A structural scan was acquired for co-registration of the ME-EPI data by means of a three-dimensional T1-weighted inversion recovery-prepared gradient echo sequence (voxel size: 1.05 × 1.05 × 1.2 mm, field of view: 270 mm, 196 slices, repetition time: 7.3 ms, echo time: 3.0 ms, inversion time: 400 ms).
Imaging preprocessing.
After resetting of the origins for both T1-weighted and ME-EP images, a study specific template was created using Advanced Normalization Tools (ANTs; http://stnava.github.io/ANTs/) for later normalization, in order to reduce localization error and improve sensitivity. One subject from the HS group had to be excluded because of atypical anatomy which undermined the template quality, resulting in a final sample of 20 LS and 19 HS subjects. The ME-EPI echoes were separated into four distinct time series (corresponding to the four individual echoes), which were then de-spiked using 3dDespike in the Analysis of Functional NeuroImages (AFNI) framework (https://afni.nimh.nih.gov), and slice time corrected using SPM12 (http://www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm/software/spm12/). Parameters for motion correction were estimated from the first echo, and applied to all four echoes using FSL's mcFLIRT. Subjects' ME-EP images were then co-registered to the T1 scan using boundary-based registration as implemented in FLIRT. Again, parameters were estimated for the first echo, and subsequently applied to all four echoes. All echoes were spatially normalized to the study-specific template, and from there to Montreal Neurological Institute (MNI) space. Finally, the images from all echoes were z-concatenated for further processing, i.e. the space-by-time matrices from each echo were appended to one another in the z-direction to form a single matrix using the 3dZcat function in AFNI. TEDANA, a python script that forms part of the Multi Echo Independent Component Analysis (MEICA) package (https://afni.nimh.nih.gov/pub/dist/src/pkundu/meica.py) was called to perform TE dependent ICA-based denoising and T2* weighted averaging (optimal combination) of echoes as described above. The denoised, optimally combined images were subsequently taken forward for motion correction, removal of white matter (WM) and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) signal via regression, and band-pass-filtering (frequency range 0.08–0.01 Hz). A comparison of the mean framewise displacement (FD) between HS and LS subjects revealed no significant difference in head motion between groups (t = 0.358, p = .72). No individual subject showed mean FD in excess of 0.12 mm.
Imaging analysis.
We defined six bilateral striatal seeds based on previous validated work on striatal connectivity: ventral striatum inferior/nucleus accumbens (VSi; ±9, 9, −8); ventral striatum superior (VSs; ±10, 15, 0); dorsal caudate (DC; ±13, 15, 9); dorsal caudal putamen (DCP; ±28, 1, 3); dorsal rostral putamen (DRP; ±25, 8, 6); and ventral rostral putamen (VRP; ±20, 12,–3) (Fig. 2A), with the radius set at 3.5 mm. The mean signal was extracted from the seed regions (voxel-wise) using the REST toolbox to perform Pearson's correlation coefficients between these regressors and the rest of the brain (voxel-wise), which were subsequently Fisher's Z transformed.
The resulting Z-maps were then taken to group-level whole-brain analysis using the General Linear Model as implemented in SPM12. Connectivity differences between groups were examined using t-contrasts. We used a cluster forming threshold of p < .001 uncorrected, to then enforce cluster-wise correction for multiple testing at p < .05 family-wise error (FWE) rate, based on previous studies. Potential effects of age or substance use (alcohol, cigarettes and cannabis) on areas showing significant group differences in connectivity were examined with an additional ANCOVA in SPM.
Finally, associations between symptom scores (O-LIFE UE) in HS subjects and Z-scores averaged across clusters showing group differences were analyzed using linear regression in SPSS.