Title.
Neural Correlates of Inhibition and Reward are Negatively Associated.
Abstract.
Individuals with impulsive and addictive disorders, including drug addiction, binge eating/obesity, and problem gambling, exhibit both impaired control over behavior and heightened sensitivity to reward. However, it is not known whether such deviation in inhibitory and reward circuitry among clinical populations is a cause or consequence of the disorders. Recent evidence suggests that these constructs may be related at the neural level, and together, increase risk for engaging in maladaptive behaviors. The current study examined the degree to which brain function during inhibition relates to brain function during receipt of reward in healthy young adults who have not yet developed problem behaviors. Participants completed the stop signal task to assess inhibitory control and the doors task to assess reactivity to monetary reward (win vs loss) during functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). Brain activation during response inhibition was negatively correlated with brain activation during reward. Specifically, less brain activation in right prefrontal regions during inhibition, including the right inferior frontal gyrus, middle frontal gyrus, and supplementary motor area, was associated with greater brain activation in left ventral striatum during receipt of monetary reward. Moreover, these associations were stronger in binge drinkers compared to non-binge drinkers. These findings suggest that the systems are related even before the onset of impulsive or addictive disorders. As such, it is possible that the association between inhibitory and reward circuitry may be a prospective marker of risk.
Introduction.
Impulsive and addictive behaviors, including drug and alcohol addiction, binge eating/obesity, and problem gambling are characterized by both impaired control over behavior and heightened reward sensitivity. These two constructs are often considered as independent risk factors for problem behaviors, but neurobiological theories propose that the two may be related, perhaps exerting reciprocal influences on each other to promote inappropriate or maladaptive behavior. This hypothesis is supported by evidence that inhibition and reward share overlapping neural circuitry, and that both are strongly linked to the dopamine system. Importantly, this relative imbalance between hypoactive inhibitory functioning and hyperactive reward functioning may be present before the onset of a disorder. If so, this neural profile could serve as an important marker of risk, as well as provide a potential target for prevention mechanisms.
Functional neuroimaging studies provide consistent evidence implicating altered inhibition and reward circuitry in addiction and impulse control disorders. For instance, individuals who abuse drugs show hypoactivation of prefrontal regions involved in inhibitory control, including the right inferior frontal gyrus (IFG), supplementary motor area (SMA), and dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC), during response inhibition. Similar hypoactivation of frontal regions during inhibition has also been observed in problem gamblers, individuals with internet gaming disorder, and adults and adolescents with bulimia nervosa, compared to healthy controls. Individuals with addictive and impulse control disorders also display heightened activation of reward regions, including the ventral striatum (VS) and medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC), in response to disorder-specific rewarding stimuli. For instance, individuals who abuse drugs display heightened activation in reward circuitry while viewing images of drugs and drug cues. Problem gamblers and individuals with internet gaming disorder also show heightened activation of reward circuitry when viewing images related to gambling or gaming, respectively, and obese individuals show greater reward response to food cues. Interestingly, there is also evidence that individuals with addictive disorders display a blunted response to non-disorder-related reward, including monetary and sexual reward, and pleasant emotional stimuli. This suggests that the relative values of different rewards may change as the disorders develop. In sum, individuals with addiction and impulse control disorders display hypoactivation of inhibitory circuitry, coupled with hyperactivation of reward circuitry to disorder-specific stimuli, compared to healthy controls.
Several recent imaging studies suggest that inhibition and reward circuits are closely linked, particularly in addicted populations. Compared to healthy controls, individuals with alcohol dependence show less functional connectivity between DLPFC (a region strongly implicated in inhibitory control) and VS during monetary reward. Moreover, lower frontal-striatal connectivity in alcohol dependent individuals is associated with greater activation of VS during reward. These findings suggest that greater behavioral sensitivity to reward could be due in part to dampened prefrontal regulation of striatal reward responses.
It is not known whether aberrant functioning of inhibition and reward circuitry in these disorders is a cause or consequence of the disorder. Preliminary prospective studies show that individuals with less engagement of inhibitory control regions during response inhibition as well as greater activation in reward regions during monetary reward are more likely to exhibit substance use later in life, suggesting a potential causal relationship. Another way to investigate the relationships between these processes before problematic behaviors develop is to examine engagement of prefrontal regions during response inhibition in relation to engagement of reward circuitry during receipt of reward in healthy, non-disordered populations. That is, a risk profile for future problematic behaviors may be poor prefrontal regulation of reward circuitry.
The current study examined the degree to which brain function during inhibition relates to brain function during reward in healthy young adults with no history of addictive or impulse control disorders. Specifically, we used fMRI to examine associations between brain activation during response inhibition and during monetary reward. Brain activation during inhibition was assessed using the stop signal task. This task activates right-lateralized frontal regions known to be involved in inhibitory control, including DLPFC, IFG, and SMA, and less frontal activation is associated with poor inhibition. Brain activation during receipt of monetary reward was assessed using the doors task, which reliably activates regions involved in reward, including VS. We hypothesized that less prefrontal activation during response inhibition would be associated with greater activation of reward circuitry during monetary reward. Additionally, we conducted exploratory analyses to examine these associations separately in binge and non-binge drinkers. As binge drinkers are a population at risk for developing substance use disorders, these analyses provided some insight as to whether associations between brain function during inhibition and reward related to risk for addictive and impulse control disorders.
Methods.
Participants.
Volunteers age 21–29 were recruited from the community through online and printed advertisements. This age range was selected to target young adults, as the study aimed to identify biomarkers of addiction vulnerability, and young adulthood is a known period of risk. Individuals younger than 21 were excluded to limit variability due to ongoing brain maturation in prefrontal regions of interest. Inclusion criteria were as follows: age 21–29, BMI between 19 and 26, at least a high school education, fluency in English, no current or past year DSM-IV diagnosis, no lifetime history of substance dependence or ADHD, no serious medical conditions, and no night shift work. Participants were excluded if they reported smoking more than five cigarettes per day or daily use of any medications other than birth control, contraindication for fMRI (e.g., metal in the body, claustrophobia), or left-handedness, or if they were pregnant, lactating, or planning to become pregnant in the next 3 months.
Measures.
Stop Signal Task.
Participants performed the stop signal task during blood oxygen level dependent (BOLD) fMRI to assess brain activation during response inhibition. Participants were instructed to respond as quickly as possible to go signals (left- or right-pointing blue arrows), and to inhibit responses on trials in which a stop signal (up-pointing red arrow superimposed on the go arrow) occurred. The duration of the delay between presentation of the go and stop signal (i.e., the stop signal delay) was adjusted to target a 50% successful inhibition rate. Stop signal reaction time (SSRT) was calculated by subtracting the mean stop signal delay from the participant’s mean go reaction time. Longer SSRT indicates a longer time needed to inhibit a response, and thus poorer inhibitory control. Supplemental Figure S1 presents a schematic of the task and the main task parameters (go reaction time, stop signal delay, and SSRT). Behavioral task performance was considered valid if participants had a mean Go reaction time of 800ms or less, Go accuracy of at least 75%, and Stop accuracy between 25% and 75%. Participants completed three task runs (80 go and 40 stop trials each), and each run required approximately 6 minutes to complete.
Doors Task.
Participants completed the doors task during BOLD fMRI to assess brain activation during monetary reward and loss. Task procedures are described in detail in. Briefly, two doors are presented on the screen, and participants are told that behind one of the doors is a monetary prize of $.50 (signaled by ‘↑’) and behind the other door is a loss of $.25 (signaled by ‘↓’). For each trial, participants are instructed to use a button box to choose one of the two doors. They are told that they will either win or lose money based on their choices, and that they had a chance of winning between $0 and $15 total based on their performance. In actuality, the subjects’ performance had no impact on outcomes. The task consisted of 30 predetermined Wins and 30 Losses presented in a pseudorandom order over two runs. The task required 15 minutes to complete, and all subjects earned $10.
Timeline Follow-Back (TLFB).
Participants completed a retrospective timeline calendar of their alcohol consumption for the past month to assess daily patterns of drinking, including number of binge episodes. For each day, participants estimated the number of standard drinks they consumed, and days on which they consumed 5 (men) or 4 (women) or more drinks were considered binge episodes. From the TLFB we calculated subjects’ total number of binge-drinking days and average number of drinks per week over the past month.
Procedure.
Participants were screened in the Human Behavioral Pharmacology Laboratory at the University of Chicago and provided informed consent. As a separate part of the parent study, they completed four drug-challenge sessions in which they received amphetamine or placebo (presented elsewhere:). Subjects then completed an fMRI session at the University of Illinois at Chicago. They abstained from drugs, including alcohol, for 24h prior to the fMRI session, as verified by self-report, breath alcohol, and urine screens. Upon arrival at the laboratory, they completed a scanner safety questionnaire and a practice round of the stop signal task. They were then placed in the scanner, where they completed a battery of tasks, including the stop signal and doors tasks. All participants completed the stop signal task prior to the doors task. Upon completion of all sessions, participants were debriefed and paid for their time. The study was approved by the IRB at each institution.
Imaging acquisition and processing.
Participants were imaged using a 3T GE scanner with an 8-channel head coil array at the UIC Center for Magnetic Resonance Research. T1-weighted high-resolution anatomical images (BRAVO sequence with 1 × 1 × 1 mm3 voxels; repetition time, 9.3ms; echo time, 3.8ms; 220 × 220 mm field of view; flip angle, 13°) were acquired for co-registration and normalization to the MNI coordinate system. Whole-brain functional imaging was performed with a standard T2*-sensitive echo planar imaging sequence (gradient-echo; repetition time, 2000ms; echo time, 22.2 ms; 64 × 64 matrix; 220 × 220 mm field of view; flip angle, 90°; 3 mm slice thickness with no gap, 44 axial slices).
Images were processed using SPM12 (Wellcome Trust Centre for Neuroimaging). Standard preprocessing of functional images for both tasks included slice-time correction, spatial realignment to correct for head motion, coregistration to the participant’s T1 image and warping to MNI space, resampling to 2mm/side voxels and smoothing with an 8mm FWHM isotropic Gaussian kernel. The general linear model was applied to the time series, convolved with the canonical hemodynamic response function and included a 128s high-pass filter. Condition effects were modeled with event-related regressors: correct go (Go) and stop (StopInh) trials, and incorrect go and stop trials for the stop signal task, and Win, Loss, and Fixation for the doors task. Effects were estimated at each voxel, and for each subject. Individual contrast maps were created for each participant (StopInh>Go for the stop signal task, and Win>Loss for the doors task). Volumes were identified as motion outliers based on image intensity difference (dvars) or framewise displacement (fd; >0.5mm) using FSL’s motion outlier tool. Six head motion parameters from the SPM realignment and the FSL-tagged motion outlier files were included as regressors-of-no-interest.
Data Analyses.
Stop Signal Task.
We conducted a second-level, random effects one sample t-test for StopInh>Go. As our hypotheses were specific to frontal regions, statistical inferences were made based on peak voxel significance within a frontal-insular-subcortical (FIS) mask previously used for analyses with this task. This 382,584 mm3 (47,823 voxels) mask included the following structural regions from AAL library available in MarsBar: medial and lateral frontal and orbital regions, bilateral precentral gyri, anterior and middle cingulate cortex, anterior insula, and subcortical motor regions consisting of bilateral putamen, pallidum, and caudate. Peak voxel activation (pFWE < 0.05) within the FIS mask was used as the statistical threshold.
Doors Task.
We conducted a second-level, random effects one sample t-test for Win>Loss. The doors task does not include a Neutral condition, and so we were not able to compare Win to Neutral. It is important to note, however, that the Win>Loss contrast is a more sensitive indicator of neural activation during reward processing than examining Win or Loss individually. As our hypotheses were specific to regions implicated in reward, statistical inferences were made based on peak voxel significance within a functional reward mask downloaded from Neurosynth. The mask was based on a meta-analysis of 532 studies with 100 terms relating to ‘reward’ and displaying regions that are reported more often in studies that load highly on ‘reward’ (http://neurosynth.org/analyses/topics/v4-topics-100/99). Peak voxel activation (pFWE < 0.05) within the reward mask was used as the statistical threshold.
Associations between brain activation during inhibition and monetary reward.
We extracted parameter estimates/β-weights representing BOLD response activation in arbitrary units averaged across all voxels within a 10-mm radius sphere surrounding peak areas of activation (pFWE < 0.05) for both tasks. For the stop signal task, we focused our analyses on significant peaks within well-established inhibitory control regions, including right IFG, MFG, insula, and SMA. For the doors task, we focused our analyses on significant peaks within VS, given this region’s well-established role in reward (see Supplementary Table 3 for correlations among all significant regions of activation). We also extracted significant peaks in visual regions to serve as control regions. We first examined the activation distributions to identify any potential outliers, defined as >3 standard deviations above or below the mean. We then conducted bivariate correlational analyses to determine the degree to which BOLD activation in inhibitory regions during response inhibition was associated with BOLD activation in reward regions during monetary reward.
Association between inhibition-reward relationships in binge and non-binge drinkers.
To examine the degree to which associations between brain activity during inhibition and reward related to risk for addictive behaviors, we tested associations separately in binge and non-binge drinkers. Binge drinkers were defined as participants who reported at least one binge episode in the last month on the TLFB and non-binge drinkers were defined as participants who reported no binge episodes in the past month.