Title.
Sexual trauma history is associated with reduced orbitofrontal network strength in substance-dependent women.
Abstract.
Aim.
Substance use disorders (SUDs) are highly comorbid with post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD). PTSD-SUD comorbidity is associated with greater functional impairments and relapse risk. Women with SUDs experience markedly higher rates of trauma and PTSD compared to men with SUDs, particularly due to sexual and domestic abuse. Despite the strong association between trauma exposure and SUDs, the neurobiological correlates are understudied, particularly among females with SUDs. However, there is indication of abnormal somatic and interoceptive processing in women with PTSD. The present study examines interoception-linked differences in intrinsic brain networks in a group of women with SUDs and varying histories of trauma exposure, some of whom have a current PTSD diagnosis.
Methods.
Pre-intervention data were analyzed from a subset (N = 43) of women in SUD residential treatment recruited for a mindfulness-based intervention efficacy clinical trial. Participants diagnosed with PTSD (n = 14) or not (n = 29) performed a task which involved attending to the somatic and visceral sensations of the breathing cycle (interoception) while undergoing a functional MRI (fMRI) scan. FMRI analysis employed independent components analysis and dual regression. First, we assessed differences in functional connectivity of interoception-modulated functional networks among those with and without PTSD. Second, we tested associations between network strength and lifetime sexual violence exposure across all participants on networks that showed significant group differences.
Results.
PTSD diagnosis was associated with reduced functional connectivity of an orbitofrontal network with the precuneus, mid-posterior insula, lateral prefrontal cortex and angular gyrus. OFC network strength was inversely associated with sexual violence exposure over-and-above the contribution of PTSD status alone.
Conclusions.
Our findings provide a novel network-level account of brain activity associated with PTSD among women with SUDs, which may inform treatment response in this subpopulation.
Highlights.
FMRI correlates of interoceptive attention in women with substance use disorder (SUD) and post-traumatic stress (PTSD)
Task-based data analyzed using independent components analysis and dual regression
Reduced orbitofrontal network connectivity with insula and frontoparietal regions in SUD_PTSD comorbidity compared to SUD
Functional networks associated with exteroception did not distinguish PTSD-SUD from SUD-only
Severity of sexual trauma exposure is inversely associated with orbitofrontal network strength beyond PTSD status
Introduction.
Interoceptive awareness is compromised in SUD, and is a functional resource for recovery.
Interoception describes the process by which the nervous system transduces, integrates, and interprets visceral and somatic sensory signals. These signals provide temporally dynamic maps of the body's homeostatic and physiological milieu at both conscious and unconscious levels of awareness which convey information critical for adaptive behaviors. The various sources of interoceptive information (e.g., cardiovascular, respiratory, gastrointestinal, immunological, etc.) are conveyed to the Central Nervous System (CNS), where they become integrated in somatosensory and viscerosensory representation. The primary neurofunctional pathways associated with interoception include the c-fiber and spinothalamic afferents, vagal afferent fibers, and specific brainstem and thalamic nuclei, which project to the insula. The influence of top-down control is evident from the up-regulation of activity linked to interoceptive signal processing in CNS (e.g., especially sectors of the insula) when attention is explicitly directed at bodily sensations and down-regulation when attention is directed away from bodily sensations.
There is presently growing interest in the role of interoception and (interoceptive dysfunction) in psychopathology (for a summary see the Biological Psychiatry consensus statement from the 2016 Interoception Summit). Interoception may be an important factor in substance use disorder (SUD), and in recovery from addiction. For instance, psychoactive drugs stimulate bodily sensations (e.g., via autonomic system stimulation) and these sensations may become part of the feelings sought by frequent users. Similarly, withdrawal is marked by aversive interoceptive signals (e.g., aching and nausea) which can drive motivation to use. Interoceptive signals contribute to drug craving and to mood states which can also be triggers for drug use. A chronic use history with a particular drug may alter the response to interoceptive signals, particularly when those signals are directly linked to the rewarding drug. For example, sympathetic arousal accompanying danger may normally provoke caution, but may provoke approach behavior in a cocaine-dependent individual, since the interoceptive signals of sympathetic activation are similar to those accompanying acute cocaine intake. In addition, impairment (or neglect) of interoceptive information could diminish the capacity for insight regarding problem drug use. Interestingly, alexithymia, the inability to recognize one's own emotional states, is associated with interoceptive deficits and is frequently comorbid with SUD. Alexithymia also predicts poorer long-term outcomes in treatment for SUD, suggesting the possibility that the interoceptive signals informing emotional awareness might be important resources for addiction recovery. Indeed several models of addiction treatment, including Cognitive Behavioral Therapy (CBT) and mindfulness-based interventions explicitly work with clients to help them better recognize their own bodily sensations. For example, in CBT, clients are taught to work to monitor their body for sensations of craving and to, “pay attention to all the somatic and affective signals and try to put them into words. What is the feeling like? Where is it?” (, pg. 51).
Impaired interoceptive awareness is a symptom of PTSD.
If interoception is an important factor in SUD and recovery from SUD, then it is important to consider the implication for the significant subset of SUD individuals with co-morbid Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD). Bodily attention appears to be relevant to the pathology of trauma-linked disorders, which includes intrusive memories and cognitions that may involve, or be triggered by interoceptive sensations and bodily awareness. In line with these behavioral observations, PTSD and sexual trauma have previously been associated with altered brain metabolism in regions associated with interoceptive and somatosensory processing. Specifically, women with PTSD due to intimate partner violence have blunted subjective pain and pain-linked anterior insula responses that are inversely correlated with avoidant symptoms, and (primarily) female patients with dissociative PTSD show reduced functional connectivity of vestibular brainstem nuclei with a parieto-posterior insula network and the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLFPC).
Trauma and substance abuse comorbidity.
Exposure to traumatic events are as high as 93% in some SUD samples. Among substance dependent groups, the lifetime prevalence of PTSD has been estimated to be between 26% and 52%, with current prevalence between 15% and 42%, depending on the sample. Women with SUDs experience markedly higher rates of traumatic stress and victimization compared to men with SUDs, particularly for traumas relating to childhood and adulthood sexual and physical abuse. Women with SUDs may also experience higher rates of current and lifetime PTSD compared to men with SUDs. PTSD symptoms exacerbate and are exacerbated by the presence of an SUD. Individuals with co-occurring SUD and PTSD may face worse clinical outcomes, including greater psychosocial problems, need for services, more severe substance use, and higher rates of relapse than for individuals with SUD-only.
Despite the established clinical relationship, trauma comorbidity in SUD is understudied in the neuroimaging literature. The few existing studies (notably:; and) highlight heightened limbic drug-cue reactivity and enhanced amygdala-striatal resting-state functional connectivity, respectively, in cocaine-dependent men with histories of trauma. These findings suggest that there may be distinctive correlates of traumatic stress and brain function among individuals with SUD. However, neither study included participants with PTSD diagnoses, a clinically relevant distinction, since exposure to trauma-categoric events in absence of post-traumatic stress symptoms may not have the same effect on brain function, nor the course and outcome of a SUD. It remains the case that PTSD has, to our knowledge, not yet been evaluated in a neuroimaging study of a substance-dependent population. Given that women with SUDs experience markedly higher rates of trauma and PTSD relative to men with SUDs, especially due to interpersonal and domestic violence, there is a clear need to investigate neurobiological correlates in trauma-exposed, substance-dependent women with-and-without current PTSD diagnoses, as it may reveal functional differences with clinical implications.
The primary goal of the present report is to characterize deficits in interoceptive processing associated with PTSD comorbidity in a sample of women with SUD. To do this, we capitalize on the robust “attentional spotlight” effect, by which brain network activity supporting interoception is enhanced when attention is explicitly directed at bodily sensations. This allows us to evaluate whether comorbid PTSD is associated with anomalous BOLD response during an interoceptive challenge (attention to bodily sensations of breathing) and to characterize the nature of any observed anomaly at the level of brain functional networks. We study this issue in low socioeconomic-status (SES) women who recently completed detoxification and enrolled in a residential treatment program for SUDs. FMRI data were acquired during the baseline period (pre-randomization) from a subset of patients participating in a clinical trial of Moment-by-Moment in Women's Recovery (MMWR). MMWR is a trauma-informed, mindfulness-based adjunct intervention for low-income, ethnically and racially diverse women in residential treatment for SUDs. If interoception is indeed a critical factor in SUD and SUD treatment response, and if interoception is compromised among those with comorbid PTSD, then characterizing that compromise is an important step towards developing tailored treatment approaches for this subgroup.
We took a data-driven analytic approach, utilizing group independent components analysis and dual regression to identify task-modulated intrinsic functional networks that may distinguish female SUD patients with and without PTSD co-morbidity. We hypothesized that PTSD comorbidity will be associated with reduced integration of the insula within networks associated with interoceptive attention. Additionally, post-hoc correlational analyses of independent component networks that demonstrate significant spatial differences between the two groups were carried out to assess their association with lifetime exposure to sexual trauma across all participants.
Methods.
Participants.
The full sample of participants were 48 ethnically-diverse, socio-economically disadvantaged female patients initiating women-only residential treatment for polysubstance use disorders (primarily moderate-to-severe methamphetamine and/or cocaine use disorders). Inclusion criteria for the study were as follows: female, between 18 and 50 years old, diagnosed with SUD, fluent in English, right-handed, and a current patient in the residential treatment program partnered with the parent study. Exclusion criteria included contraindications for fMRI: currently or possibly pregnant, using medical devices (cardiac pacemaker, implanted cardiac defibrillator, etc.), metal fragments including shrapnel or other nonremovable metal devices including dental braces or retainers, intrauterine device, history of head trauma resulting in loss of consciousness for >5 min, documented or subjectively reported claustrophobia, hair extensions or a wig connected by wire, permanent eyeliner, and BMI >36. Additionally, participants were excluded from the parent study if they had an untreated severe chronic mental health condition or untreated psychotic disorder based on clinical intake LR-DSM-IV or DSM-V or diagnostic assessment, or reported suicidality during the prior 30 days based on clinical intake assessment.
Psychiatric diagnoses were based on LR-DSM-IV or DSM-V which were conducted by staff of the residential treatment program (the residential treatment program transitioned from the LR-DSM-IV to the DSM-V during the course of the clinical trial). Diagnoses were carried out by treatment center staff and confirmed by consensus meeting with the lead psychiatrist. Although comorbid psychiatric diagnoses were not exclusionary for the parent study, for the present analysis we excluded individuals with the following diagnoses: schizophrenia, anxiety disorder other than PTSD, no history of stimulant use (the majority of patients had primarily diagnoses of stimulant use disorders or had polysubstance use histories that included stimulants). Four participants were omitted based on these criteria. A large proportion of participants for whom information was available were taking prescribed psychoactive medications (39.5%) and/or had mood disorders (23.3%), therefore we did not exclude participants on the basis of medication use or mood-disorder status. One participant was removed from the study for the presence of non-removable dental work that the participant did not report during screening which caused signal dropout. The 43 remaining participants were included in the study, 14 of whom had received a PTSD diagnosis. Each of the 43 participants contributed two runs of fMRI data, except for four subjects (two from the PTSD, two from the noPTSD group) who contributed one run due to excessive motion (>3 mm). See Table 1 for demographics and clinical characteristics. All study procedures were approved by the University of Southern California Institutional Review Board. Participants provided written informed consent and were compensated for their time.
Measures.
Life stressors checklist – revised.
The Life Stressor Checklist-Revised (LSC-R) is a measure of traumatic events and stressors that are particularly relevant to women's life experiences. Its use has been validated in women with co-morbid substance abuse and mental disorders, with histories of interpersonal violence victimization. LSC-R follows a yes/no response format with follow-up questions that characterize the life stage(s) at which events occurred and the degree to which the respondent is currently affected by the experience. Events can be brief, single incidents or repeated traumas that may have occurred at any point in the lifespan (prior to age eighteen, adulthood, and within the last 8 months of the interview). For the present study, we use dichotomously scored responses (range: 0–30) reflecting events at any point during the lifespan.
Addiction severity index.
Alcohol and substance use severity for the 30 days prior to treatment entry was assessed using the Addiction Severity Index (ASI:) and the Timeline Followback Interview (TLFB).
Post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) symptoms scale.
The PTSD Symptom Scale (PSS-I) is a semi-structured interview, which was used to obtain an overall severity score of PTSD symptoms according to DSM-IV, as well as separate severity scores for symptom subdomains: re-experiencing, avoidance, arousal. Scores range from 0 to 34, with higher scores reflecting more severe symptomatology.
The interoceptive-exteroceptive attention task.
The Interoceptive-Exteroceptive Attention task (The IN-OUT task) was adapted from, which investigated BOLD changes in interoceptive attention in response to Mindfulness-Based Stress Reduction (MBSR) training. The approach contrasts brain activity during attention to the sensations of breathing versus attention to an external target. By contrasting internally and externally directed focus, this approach capitalizes on the “attentional spotlight” effect, whereby focus on a sensory quality amplifies the signal within brain regions associated with processing that sensory modality. Variations on this task have previously been used to isolate BOLD responses in regions associated with interoception in expert meditators, healthy individuals, as well as in clinical populations with depression and anorexia nervosa. The magnitude of insula response during focused breathing tasks appears to track the quality of internal focus, which increases as a function of hours practiced in novices who participated in a mindfulness-based stress reduction (MBSR) program. During the IN-OUT task participants performed two experimental conditions involving sustained attentional targets: the interoceptive (IN) condition and the exteroceptive (OUT) condition. Participants completed two runs, each containing nine blocks. The blocks were presented in pseudorandomized order- half of the runs contained five blocks of IN, and four blocks of OUT, while other blocks contained four blocks of IN and five blocks of OUT. For the IN condition, subjects were instructed to attend to bodily sensations associated with their breathing cycle with the following instructions: “Please pay attention to the physical sensation of the breath wherever you feel it most strongly in the body. Follow the natural and spontaneous movement of the breath, not trying to change it in any way. Just pay attention to it. If you find that your attention has wandered to something else, gently but firmly bring it back to the physical sensations of the breath in the body”. During the IN condition, an “O” appeared on the center of the screen for 36 s, on which subjects were instructed to fix their gaze while simultaneously attending to the sensations of their breathing cycle. The OUT condition consisted of a “1-back” task, which we considered to be an attention control condition. During the OUT blocks, a letter from the set (A, B, C, D) was presented for 500 ms in a pseudorandom sequence. A fixation cross was presented in between each letter for 900 ms. When a letter repeated, the participant was instructed to press a key on the button box. The OUT blocks lasted 38.7 s. The sequence of letters presented, key presses, and response times were recorded for each OUT block. Prior to each block, the subject was presented with an instruction screen for 10 s that cued them to the upcoming block.
fMRI acquisition and analysis.
Imaging set-up.
Images were acquired with a 3 T Siemens MAGNETON Prisma System, with a 20-channel head coil. Functional images were obtained using a gradient echo, echo-planar, T2*-weighted pulse sequence (TR = 2000 ms, one shot per repetition, TE = 25 ms, flip angle = 90°, 64 × 64 in-plane resolution). Forty-one slices covering the entire brain were acquired with a voxel resolution of 3 cubic mm. Structural T1-weighted magnetization-prepared rapid gradient echo (MPRAGE) images were acquired with the following parameters: TR = 1950 ms, TE = 2.26 ms, TI = 900 ms, Flip Angle = 7°, matrix = 256 × 224, 1 mm isotropic resolution, 176 sagittal slices, acquisition time = 241 s.
Respiration and pulse oximetry were measured during scanning using Biopac MP150 hardware and MR-compatible respiratory stretch transducer and pulse oximeter (Nonin Medical, 8600FO). Physiological data were sampled with a 1000 Hz sampling rate. The acquisition was synchronized to the scanner via a TTL pulse, and recorded in Biopac Acqknowledge software. The IN-OUT Attention task was scripted using MATLAB and Psychtoolbox 3.
fMRI pre-processing.
RETROICOR and respiratory and cardiac response functions (RVHRCOR) were applied to the functional volumes to reduce non-neuronal contributions of physiological noise. RETROICOR models periodic pulsatile noise in the BOLD time series associated with respiratory and cardiac cycles as a low-order Fourier phase expansion. RVHRCOR removes low-frequency cardiac and respiratory effects by convolving the respiratory and cardiac data with their respective response functions. The convolved cardiac and respiratory waveforms are then used as regressors for each voxel's time series using least squares. RETROICOR (order = 4) and RVHRCOR were performed in MATLAB using code obtained from C. Chang. Subsequent pre-processing steps were carried out in FSL (FMRIB's Software Library; http://fsl.fmrib.ox.ac.uk/fsl/fslwiki/) and included skull stripping with BET, motion correction (MCFLIRT), slice-timing correction, high-pass temporal filtering (90 s), and spatial smoothing using a 5 mm Gaussian FWHM filter. Additional sources of movement and scanner noise were removed using FSL's MELODIC ICA for each individual run. Subject-level ICA-based denoising substantially improves the reproducibility of group-ICA decompositions relative to both motion scrubbing and nuisance regression. Each component for each subject and run was manually inspected and labeled by an experimenter blind to participant diagnoses. Components flagged as artifact were regressed from the functional volume. The functional volumes were realigned to each participant's respective T1-weighted anatomical image, then normalized into standard space using 12°-of-freedom affine transformation and 2 mm resolution.
Group independent components analysis.
To identify group-level intrinsic functional networks, we utilized the Multivariate Exploratory Linear Optimized Decomposition into Independent Components (MELODIC) algorithm in FSL. Independent components analysis separates underlying sources from a linearly mixed multivariate signal. Preprocessed fMRI data from each subject and run were temporally concatenated into a single 4D file (each subject provided two runs of data, less the four subjects who provided only one run, for a total of 82 runs) and submitted to MELODIC analysis, with variance normalization. Thus, the group ICA solution reflects the combined contributions of both the PTSD and noPTSD groups. The dimensionality of the solution was constrained to 20 networks, a level of granularity commonly used to identify large-scale networks. Thereafter, the 20 group-level normalized networks were spatially cross-correlated against 20 network solution to determine their correspondence to a canonical set of intrinsic networks and artifacts.
Dual regression to obtain subject-level networks.
In the first stage of the dual regression, the unthresholded group-level networks are first regressed onto each participant's fMRI series to extract beta-weights that form a subject-specific time series for each component and functional run (the spatial regression). Next, the variance-normalized time series for each component and run obtained from the first stage are used as predictor vectors for each participant's fMRI series to obtain a subject-specific component map (the temporal regression). These whole-brain spatial maps reflect each voxel's correlation with the group-level network; consequently, functional connectivity of a given network can manifest in any region of the brain, regardless of whether that region is typically associated with the canonical network. This approach allows identification of group differences in spatial connectivity of functional networks. We carried out dual regression on each group-level network individually, excluding: 1) the six networks deemed artifactual based on visual inspection and comparison with canonical networks and 2) the six networks that were not found to be significantly task-related (see Section 3.6 below). Thus, we carried out eight separate dual regressions on the networks identified as significantly associated with IN and OUT conditions of the task. Each dual regression produced two spatial maps per subject (corresponding to the two runs, less the four exceptions who contributed one run of data). Each subject's Z-transformed maps were then averaged using the fslmaths to form a single 3D file for each component. These averaged subject-specific spatial maps for a given component were then concatenated to form a 4D file, which served as the input for cross-subject statistics.
Identification of task-modulated networks.
To identify task-modulated networks in ICA-analysis of task fMRI data, we regressed the run-specific activity time courses for each network against the run's respective task-design matrix using the fsl_glm utility. This approach essentially answers the question of whether a network is more active in one task condition, by allowing us to determine the fit between the network time-course and task design for each run. After combining the beta estimates and variance from each regression using a fixed effects approach to obtain a single parameter estimate per subject and component, we could determine which components were relatively more active during IN blocks compared to OUT blocks and visa-versa using one-sample t-tests. Since contrast estimates for the relative comparison of the two conditions (i.e. OUT > IN, IN > OUT) differ only in sign, t-tests were set-up such that positive values indicated the degree to which the network was relatively more active during the IN condition, while negative values indicated the degree to which the network was relatively more active during the OUT condition. The p-values were further Bonferroni corrected, which limited the number of networks only to those that most strongly differentiated the two task conditions. Components which were significantly associated with the task were used to compare spatial differences in network functional connectivity across the PTSD and noPTSD groups.
Functional connectivity of task-modulated networks.
Group differences between noPTSD and PTSD were assessed for the networks that were determined to be significantly task-modulated, constrained to voxels within a binarized mask containing positive values. We used non-parametric Monte-Carlo based permutation testing with 10,000 permutations and alpha = 0.05. Clusters of activation were estimated using threshold-free cluster enhancement (TFCE) with a variance smoothing factor of 5 mm. This procedure corrects for the family-wise error rate. Mean-centered age and ASI drug use severity scores were included as covariates of no-interest. Statistical maps were rendered onto a standard MNI brain using MRIcroGL (http://www.mccauslandcenter.sc.edu/mricrogl/). Probabilistic anatomical labels for cluster maxima were obtained from the Harvard-Oxford Cortical and Subcortical atlases, reported in standard MNI space.