Title.
Thalamic cortical error-related responses in adult social drinkers: sex differences and problem alcohol use.
Abstract.
Background.
Error-related brain activities are altered in individuals with substance use disorders. Here we examined error-related activities in relation to problem drinking in nondependent alcohol drinkers. In particular, we investigated sex differences and whether altered error responses are related to post-error behavioral control.
Methods.
A sample of 145 non-dependent drinkers (77 women) performed the stop signal task during fMRI. Imaging data were processed and modeled using statistical parametric mapping. Independent sample t-test and linear regression were employed to examine sex differences in error response and relationship between error response and problem drinking.
Results.
Compared to men, women showed greater error-related (stop error > go success) activations in bilateral thalamus, right middle/superior temporal cortex and bilateral dorsal anterior cingulate cortex. In whole-brain linear regression of error responses against the Alcohol Use Disorder Identification Test (AUDIT) score, a wide swath of cortical and subcortical regions, including the thalamus, showed decreased activation in association with problem drinking in women but not in men. However, men and women were not different in the extent of post-error slowing (PES) and decreased thalamic error response in association with problem drinking was not related to the extent of PES in women.
Conclusions.
The results suggest sex differences in error-related activations with heavier drinking associated with reduced error activations in women but not in men. These differences in cerebral activations may reflect higher physiological arousal in response to errors and greater vulnerability of saliency-related arousal response to problem drinking in female as compared to male social drinkers.
1. Introduction.
Error-related cerebral and behavioral responses are an important phenotype of various neuropsychiatric conditions including substance use disorders. Compared with non-drug users, chronic cannabis users showed diminished error-correcting behavior and error response in the dorsal anterior cingulate cortex and left hippocampus in a paired associative learning task. Similar findings were also documented for cocaine addicted individuals in behavioral paradigms of response inhibition. Blunted left middle frontal cortical activations to commission errors in a go/no-go task predicted early substance use in adolescents. Together, these findings associate deficient error monitoring and error-related behavioral adjustment with substance misuse.
Whereas the findings on illicit substance users appear to be largely consistent, the literature is mixed for alcohol misuse. For instance, regional activations to no-go errors distinguished heavy and light non-dependent drinkers, each engaging predominantly visually-driven emotional and task control neural networks. Alcohol dependence and higher alcohol consumption is associated with less post-error behavioral adjustment in a stop signal task. In contrast, some studies failed to identify differences in error-related brain response or in post-error behavioral adjustment in heavy as compared to light drinkers. In fact, alcohol dependent individuals appeared to demonstrate higher error-related responses as compared to controls. An earlier review highlighted the complexity in employing interference control as a cognitive phenotype as a severity marker of alcohol misuse, with many studies revealing negative findings. However, what exactly accounted for the discrepancy in findings remained unclear. In particular, sex differences were often not considered in these studies.
Men and women demonstrate important differences in their drug and alcohol use behaviors, clinical profiles of substance and alcohol use disorders as well as the risk factors and consequences of problem drinking. The biological bases of these sex differences have been a focus of active research and studies of brain imaging aimed to understand how men and women respond differently to psychological challenges of importance to habitual drug and alcohol use. For instance, stress may precipitate drug and alcohol use via distinct neural processes in men and women, with women more vulnerable to the influence of negative affect and stress. In support, stress induced by personalized guided imagery elicited sex-specific cerebral responses. More broadly, men and women engaged distinct neural circuits in affective processing; women but not men showed correlated activations of bilateral caudate head and left thalamus during experience of social conflicts, a potential risk factor for problem drinking. Of direct relevance to the current study, men and women exhibited differences in error-related responses, with women showing higher electrophysiological or blood oxygenation level dependent (BOLD) responses to errors as compared to men. On the other hand, men and women did not appear to differ in the extent of post-error behavioral control. Thus, error-related responses may relate to problem drinking differently in men and women but whether these differences manifest in altered post-error behavioral control remains an open question.
In the current study, we investigated how problem drinking is associated with error-related cerebral responses and whether men and women differ in error-related response, and in its association with problem drinking and deficits in cognitive control. We combined fMRI and the stop signal task (SST) to address these questions. In the SST participants are required to respond to a frequent go signal and withhold response to an occasional stop signal. Participants showed higher skin conductance response, reflecting higher physiological arousal, to stop error as compared to both go and stop success trials. Further, participants typically slowed down in response in go trials following a stop error trial as compared to those following another go trial. Post-error slowing reflects behavioral adjustment, a critical component process of cognitive control frequently compromised in individuals with substance use disorders. Thus, the SST would provide an opportunity to investigate whether error-related cerebral responses are associated with problem drinking and deficits in cognitive control.
2. Methods.
2.1 Subjects, Informed Consent, and Assessment.
Study participants were recruited with newspaper and radio advertisements as well as flyers posted in the greater New Haven area. All participants were free of major medical illness, past or present neurological and psychiatric illnesses including substance use disorders (SCID-I for DSM-IV), denied current use of illicit substance, and showed negative urine toxicology tests for stimulants, opioids, marijuana, and benzodiazepines at the time of MRI. Individuals who were using any psychotropic medications were not invited to participate in the study. Pregnant or lactating women were also excluded. Participants were further required to be free of MRI-contraindications per Yale Magnetic Resonance Research Center's safety guidelines.
One hundred and forty-five social drinkers (77 women; age 31 ± 13 years; all right-handed) were included in this study. This cohort is a subsample of the 158 (86 women) social drinkers reported in our recent work, where 13 subjects participated in fMRI of a different behavioral task. All participants completed questionnaires regarding alcohol use over the past year, including average number of days of drinking and average number of drinks consumed per occasion, framed on a monthly basis, as well as the Alcohol Use Disorders Identification Test (AUDIT). AUDIT score was calculated by summing subscores of ten self-report questions regarding level of alcohol use, alcohol-related problems, and concern expressed by others for one's drinking behavior. Each question receives a score ranging from 0 to 4, with higher numbers corresponding to a greater level of risk for having or developing an alcohol use disorder. The mean (± SD) AUDIT score was 5.1 (± 4.2) across all subjects, in a range typical of non-dependent drinkers and significantly lower than those reported for alcohol dependent individuals.
Participants were also assessed with the Barratt Impulsivity Scale (BIS-11) and Alcohol Expectancy Questionnaire (AEQ-3). BIS-11 is a 30-item self-report questionnaire designed to measure impulsivity. All items are scored on a 4-point scale (1 = rarely/never; 2 = occasionally; 3 = often; 4 = almost always/always). The total score thus ranges from 30 to 120, with a higher score indicating higher impulsivity. Eleven of the 30 items are reverse scored to avoid response bias. The AEQ-3 consisted of 40 items to address both positive (6 subscales) and negative (2 subscales) alcohol expectancy, confirmed by factor analysis and invariant across sex and race. Each subscale contains 4 to 6 statements that can be endorsed on a six-point scale, from “disagree strongly ” to “agree strongly ”. Despite the 8 factors identified and confirmed with factor analysis, ratings on the 8 factors are highly correlated (George et al, 1995). Thus, the authors acknowledged that the discriminant validity among the 8 subscores was at best moderate. Here, we used the global positive subscore to represent alcohol expectancy. A summary of demographic and clinical measures is presented in Table 1.
All subjects signed a written informed consent, in accordance to a protocol approved by the Yale Human Investigation Committee, prior to the study.
2.2 Behavioral task.
We employed a simple reaction time task in this stop-signal paradigm. There were two trial types: “go” and “stop,” randomly intermixed in presentation each with a probability of 0.75 and 0.25, and with an inter-trial interval of 2 s. A small dot appeared on the screen to engage attention at the beginning of a go trial. After a randomized time interval between 1 and 5 s, drawn from a uniform distribution, the dot turned into a circle (the “go” signal), prompting the subjects to quickly press a button. The circle vanished at a button press or after 1 s has elapsed, whichever came first, and the trial terminated. A premature button press prior to the appearance of the circle also terminated the trial. In a stop trial, an additional “X,” the “stop” signal, appeared after and replaced the go signal, and instructed participants to withhold their response. Similar to go trials, a stop trial terminated at button press or 1 s after the appearance of the stop signal. Failure to withhold the response for the 1 s constituted a stop error. The stop signal delay (SSD) – the time interval between go and stop signals – started at 200 ms and was adjusted according to a staircase procedure, increasing and decreasing by 67 ms each after a successful and failed stop. Subjects were instructed to respond to the go signal quickly while keeping in mind that a stop signal could come up occasionally. The staircase procedure ensures that subjects would succeed in withholding their response in approximately half of the stop trials.
2.3 Analyses of behavioral performance in the stop signal task.
We computed a critical SSD that represents the time delay between go and stop signals that a subject would need to succeed in 50% of the stop trials. Specifically, SSDs across trials were grouped into runs, with each run defined as a monotonically increasing or decreasing series. We derived a mid-run estimate by taking the median SSD of every second run. The critical SSD was computed by taking the mean of all mid-run SSDs. It was reported that, except for experiments with a small number of trials (less than 30), the mid-run estimate was close to the maximum likelihood estimate of X50 (50% positive response; i.e., 50% stop success in the SST,). The stop signal reaction time (SSRT) was computed by subtracting the critical SSD from the median go trial RT.
It is known that in the SST the RT of a correct response is prolonged following a stop-error trial, compared with other correct responses, and this prolonged RT is thought to reflect error-detection and conflict monitoring (Hendrick et al., 2010). We thus compared the RT of the go trials that followed a stop-error trial and those that followed another go trial, and termed the effect size of this RT difference “post-error slowing” (PES).
2.4 Image acquisition, preprocessing and statistical tests.
All imaging data were collected in the same 3T Siemens Trio scanner (Erlangen, Germany) while subjects performed the SST, as described in detail in our previous work. Each scan comprised four 10-minute runs of the SST. Caffeine-using subjects were allowed drink coffee or other caffeinated beverages until 30 minutes before MRI. Functional blood oxygenation-level dependent (BOLD) signals were acquired with a single-shot gradient echo echo-planar imaging sequence, with 32 axial slices parallel to the AC-PC line covering the whole brain, using published parameters: TR=2000 ms, TE=25 ms, bandwidth=2004 Hz/pixel, flip angle=85°, FOV=220×220 mm2, matrix=64×64, slice thickness=4 mm and no gap. A high-resolution 3D structural image (MPRAGE; 1 mm resolution) was also obtained for anatomical co-registration.
Functional MRI data was preprocessed with Statistical Parametric Mapping 12 (SPM12) (Wellcome Department of Imaging Neuroscience, University College London, U.K.). Images from the first five TRs at the beginning of each trial were discarded so only BOLD signals in a steady state were included in analyses. Images of each individual subject were first corrected for slice timing, realigned (motion-corrected). A mean functional image volume was constructed for each subject for each run from the realigned image volumes. The anatomical images (T1-weighted) were co-registered to the mean functional image, and normalized to an MNI (Montreal Neurological Institute) template with affine registration followed by nonlinear transformation using a unified segmentation and registration approach. The normalization parameters determined for the anatomical volume were then applied to the corresponding functional image volumes for each subject. Finally, images were smoothed with a Gaussian kernel of 8 mm at Full Width at Half Maximum. Images from the first five TRs at the beginning of each session were discarded so only signals with steady-state equilibrium between radio frequency pulsing and relaxation were included in data analyses.
We distinguished four trial outcomes in this event-related study: go success (GS), go error, stop success (SS), and stop error (SE), and modeled BOLD signals by convolving the onsets of the go signals of each trial with a canonical hemodynamic response function (HRF) and the temporal derivative of the canonical HRF. Realignment parameters in all six dimensions were entered in the model. We included the following variables as parametric modulators in the model: RT of GS trials, SSD of SS trials, and SSD of SE trials, in that order. Serial autocorrelation of the time series was corrected by a first degree autoregressive or AR model. The data were high- pass filtered (1/128 Hz cutoff) to remove low-frequency signal drifts. Group analyses were performed also using SPM12 on the error contrast maps (SE>GS) using one and two sample t-tests and multiple regressions, with age as covariate. Specifically, we employed a whole-brain regression against AUDIT score to examine regional responses to errors in association with problem drinking for men and women separately. All group analyses were examined with a threshold of voxel p<0.001 uncorrected in combination with cluster p<0.05, FWE corrected, according to current reporting standards.