Title.
Time‐dependent neuronal changes associated with craving in opioid dependence: an fMRI study.
Abstract.
Abstract.
Relapse after initially successful treatment is a significant problem facing the treatment of opioid dependence. Evidence suggests craving elicited by re‐exposure to drug cues may precipitate relapse. Attempts to identify neural biomarkers of cue‐elicited craving have yielded inconsistent findings. We aimed to apply a novel continuous functional magnetic resonance imaging technique to follow the minute‐to‐minute evolution of brain responses, which correlate with the waxing and waning of craving. Newly detoxified male opioid‐dependent patients and healthy control participants attended two separate, counterbalanced, functional magnetic resonance imaging scanning sessions during which they viewed a 10‐minute video (drug cue or neutral cue) followed by 5 minutes of fixation. Participants rated the intensity of their craving throughout each session. We hypothesized that subcortical/ventral prefrontal cortex (PFC) regions and dorsal PFC regions would show different associations with craving reflecting their putative roles in appetitive processing versus cognitive control. Compared with controls, drug cue (minus neutral cue) video recruited the left amygdala and was temporally correlated with craving. In contrast, dorsal anterior cingulate blood‐oxygen‐level‐dependent signal time course was higher than controls only during a period after cue exposure when craving levels were declining. Against expectations, neither the ventral striatum nor ventral PFC was significantly recruited by drug cue exposure. Findings suggest that the amygdala has a central role in craving, whereas the dorsal anterior cingulate may control craving in treatment‐seeking patients. Time course analysis yielded new insights into the neural substrates of craving that could objectively validate development of psychological and pharmacological approaches to sustained abstinence.
Introduction.
Neural and psychological responses to stimuli or contexts previously associated with drug reward (i.e. drug cues) play a significant role in drug dependence (Lubman, Yucel, & Pantelis 2004; Epstein et al. 2009). Conditioning mechanisms increase the incentive value of these cues, creating powerful secondary reinforcers that can capture attention and elicit craving (Tiffany & Wray 2012), and contribute to further drug seeking and drug taking. Consistent with this notion, several studies have reported that craving measured before or during treatment can predict subsequent relapse (Weiss et al. 2003; McHugh et al. 2014), whilst ‘real‐time’ craving and cue exposure have been shown to immediately precede relapse and drug use (Epstein et al. 2009; Moore et al. 2014; Fatseas et al. 2015). Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) studies have attempted to identify brain systems that mediate cue‐elicited craving (Zijlstra et al. 2009; Li et al. 2012; Jasinska et al. 2014). Two recent meta‐analyses of these studies (Chase et al. 2011; Kuhn & Gallinat 2011) report reliable activation to drug cues within regions including the amygdala and ventral striatum, which are important for processing reward‐related stimuli and motivation (Haber & Knutson 2010), and medial prefrontal regions. These include the ventral medial prefrontal cortex (VmPFC) (Chase et al. 2011), which is involved in the representation of reward value and reward‐related decision making (Elliott, Agnew, & Deakin 2008; Grabenhorst & Rolls 2011), and the anterior cingulate cortex (Kuhn & Gallinat 2011), which is important for reward and error‐related behavioural and cognitive control (Shenhav, Botvinick, & Cohen 2013). Although there are some consistencies in the regions that are activated by drug cues, there is little evidence that any reliably correlate with craving (Tiffany & Wray 2012). This suggests the typical design of cue‐elicited craving studies, that measure brief presentations of drug‐related images interspersed with neutral control images, identify immediate brain responses to drug cues, rather than craving per se. Video imagery of drug‐related activities provides contextually richer and more realistic cues that better model real‐world exposure and elicit strong craving responses (Childress et al. 1999; Tong, Bovbjerg, & Erblich 2007). Videos have been extensively used to follow psychophysiological responses to craving although this has been limited to box‐car on‐off fMRI designs through the lack of techniques or tradition for following blood‐oxygen‐level‐dependent (BOLD) responses over minutes. We borrowed pharmaco‐MRI methods developed to follow and localize the action of drugs on the CNS, to follow the effect of sustained craving elicited by video cues, in hypothesized regions of interest. We reasoned that this approach could capitalize on the video mode of drug cue delivery, providing time course fMRI information for investigation of how psychological variables relate to brain response over time. We applied this approach in recently abstinent individuals with opioid dependence (OD), to better delineate brain responses related to the experience of craving over a period of cue exposure. We additionally investigated brain response for a period after cue exposure to gain insights into regions that may be involved in cognitive/behavioural control. Although videos have previously been used in fMRI studies of substance dependence, to our knowledge, dynamic brain responses to these cues have not previously been explored.
In recovering dependent individuals, brain responses to drug cues may reflect not only craving‐related activity but also attempts to control craving (Goldstein & Volkow 2011). This may explain why some participants in previous cue exposure studies have not reported significant overall changes in craving scores (Zijlstra et al. 2009; Wang et al. 2011). Time course information derived dynamically across video stimuli could help distinguish briefly induced craving and subsequent control at a neuronal level, thereby disambiguating distinct processes that may have been compounded in previous studies. We hypothesized that early development of craving would be associated with activation of amygdala, ventral striatum and ventral medial prefrontal regions involved in processing reward value and incentive motivation. In our treatment‐seeking sample, with long‐term goals of abstinence, we further hypothesized that response in the dorsal anterior cingulate cortex would develop both during and after the video as subjective craving decreased, reflecting conscious control mechanisms.
Methods and Materials.
Participants.
Opioid‐dependent individuals (n = 18).
This study was approved by the NHS Research Ethics Committee. Participants with OD were recruited from a residential detoxification unit within Greater Manchester (see Table 1 for demographic information). Treatment involved a 4‐week residential stay with a 10‐day methadone stabilization and reduction, followed by 10 days of lofexidine treatment, an alpha‐2 adrenergic receptor agonist used to treat opioid withdrawal symptoms. Participants took part in the study during the last week of their residential stay when they were opioid free (confirmed by urine drug screen). Lofexidine was extended at low doses for participants still experiencing withdrawal symptoms during this final week, and some ODs were receiving other psychoactive medications as indicated by Supporting Information Table  S1 . The OD group was recruited according to the following inclusion criteria: male, aged 18–55; current DSM IV heroin dependence (the majority of patients also met criteria for current or past dependence on other substances; Table 1); no history of serious psychiatric, neurological or physical illness; no contraindications for MRI; and IQ of ≥85 [determined using the Wechsler Test of Adult Reading (Holdnack 2001)]. Participants were identified and approached by members of the clinical team on the basis of detailed physical and mental health assessments on admission to the unit. All participants meeting the inclusion criteria were approached to take part in the study. A total of 39 patients were enrolled in the craving study; however, 19 were discharged from the unit before any testing could take place (mainly self‐discharge or early discharge due to use of prohibited substances). Twenty patients were scanned as part of the study, although two were excluded from analysis because of excessive movement (see Preprocessing section for further details), leaving n = 18 who were included in analysis. Handedness was assessed with the Edinburgh Handedness Inventory (Oldfield 1971).
Healthy controls (n = 20).
Healthy controls (HCs) were recruited who were familiar with graphic scenes of drug use because of occupational experience (e.g. drug treatment workers and other health professionals). The HC group met the same inclusion criteria outlined previously and additionally had no current or past history of drug dependence or misuse (except nicotine) and had never used heroin in their lifetime. No healthy volunteers were receiving psychoactive medications. Participants were screened with the Mini International Neuropsychiatric Interview (Sheehan et al. 1998), Wechsler Test of Adult Reading and Edinburgh Handedness Inventory.
All participants provided written consent and were paid for their participation with vouchers.
Procedures.
Participants attended two separate, counterbalanced sessions. Patients were scanned in the last week of their residential stay when they were opioid free. On each occasion, participants underwent fMRI, once whilst viewing a 10‐minute heroin video (drug cue session) and once whilst viewing a 10‐minute video containing scenes matched for visual complexity but lacking emotionally arousing content (neutral session). Videos were preceded and followed by 5 minutes of fixation (Fig. 1). Images were presented using e‐prime (Psychology Software Tools, Inc, Sharpsburg, USA) (version 2.0).
Measures.
Participants were presented with Likert‐like subjective rating scales throughout the scanning session. Participants were prompted to respond by a screen displaying the following text ‘do you feel you are …’, which was presented for 3 seconds before slides stating ‘Craving?’, ‘Withdrawing?’, ‘Anxious?’ or ‘High?’, were presented for 4 seconds along with the following scale: 1 (not all), 2 (slightly), 3 (moderately) and 4 (extremely). Participants responded via a button box. The scales were presented at 3‐minute intervals in each session (Fig. 1)
Behavioural data.
Mixed ANOVAs were carried out for each of the four subjective rating scales with time of rating (six levels including a pre‐video baseline rating, three during the video and two post‐video ratings) and session (drug cue, neutral) as within‐subject factors and group (HC, OD) as the between‐subject factor. Session order was included as a covariate. The pre‐video rating taken during the last minute of the baseline period (T0) was used as the pre‐video baseline rating. A Greenhouse‐Geisser correction was applied when Mauchley's assumption of sphericity was violated. Ratings from one HC were not included as the participant could not see the rating scales.
Scanning and analysis.
Whole brain T2* weighted images were acquired on a 3 Tesla Philips Achieva scanner with single shot, multi‐slice echo planar (EPI) pulse sequence. Each volume comprised 34 contiguous axial slices (TR = 2.5 s, TE = 35 ms, 96 × 96 matrix, in‐plane voxel size 3.0 mm × 3.0 mm, slice thickness 3.5 mm). A high‐resolution T1‐weighted structural image was also acquired for each participant for coregistration during preprocessing and to exclude any structural abnormality.
Preprocessing.
Functional data were analysed using statistical parametric mapping (SPM8; The Wellcome Department of Cognitive Neurology, London, UK) running in MATLAB (Matlab, R2012a; Mathworks, Natick, Massachusetts, U.S.A.). Functional images were realigned and coregistered with the T1 structural image before normalization of the functional images into standard space was carried out using the unified segmentation approach (Ashburner & Friston 2005). Normalized images were smoothed using an 8‐mm Gaussian kernel. The smoothed functional images of the participants who moved more than 1 voxel were repaired by an interpolation method using the artefact repair toolbox (http://cibsr.stanford.edu/tools/ArtRepair/ArtRepair.htm). Two ODs with excessive movement were excluded (>10 percent volumes needing repairing). Eighteen ODs and 20 HCs were entered into subsequent analyses.
First‐level analysis.
For both the drug cue and the neutral session, data were acquired continuously for 20 minutes (5 minutes before the start of each video to allow participants to acclimatize to the scanner environment, 10 minutes during presentation of the video and an additional 5 minutes after the end of the video) (Fig. 1). The resultant 480 acquired scans were divided into 1‐minute time‐bins (20 time‐bins in total). The 5th minute of the pre‐video baseline was treated as the baseline time‐bin T0, with each subsequent time‐bin (T1–15) compared with T0 using regression analysis within a general linear model framework. The exact shape of the signal of interest was unknown; therefore, no high‐pass filter was used. The neutral session averages were subtracted from the time equivalent drug cue session averages, resulting in ‘drug cue session–neutral session’ contrast images.
Region‐of‐interest analysis.
A region‐of‐interest (ROI) approach was used to extract time course signals from key brain regions involved in drug cue reactivity based on recent meta‐analyses (Chase et al. 2011; Kuhn & Gallinat 2011). These composed of spheres of 7‐mm radius centred around the bilateral ventral striatum, amygdala and VmPFC, coordinates from Chase et al. (2011), and anterior cingulate cortex, coordinates from Kuhn & Gallinat (2011), as displayed in Fig. 3. Mean drug cue‐neutral session contrast estimates were extracted from each of the six ROIs using the Easy ROI toolbox implemented in SPM (http://www.sbirc.ed.ac.uk/LCL/LCL_M1.html) and entered into mixed ANOVAs in SPSS (version 20) to investigate effects of time and group on drug cue‐neutral session BOLD signal. Investigations were carried out for the whole session (T0 to T15) and for the video time‐bins (T1–T10) and post‐video time‐bins separately (T11 to T15) with session order included as a covariate. A Greenhouse‐Geisser correction was applied when Mauchley's assumption of sphericity was violated. A Bonferroni correction for the six separate ROIs results in a significance value of p < 0.008 for this analysis. However, this is a conservative approach, which may result in false negatives. Results are therefore reported significant at p < 0.05 with results surviving Bonferroni correction highlighted.
ROI BOLD signal time course and subjective rating time course temporal correlation analysis.
In participants reporting a subjective rating change in response to the drug cue session, we investigated whether their subjective rating time course was temporally correlated with fMRI signal in the ROIs. Analyses were restricted to subjective ratings and ROI BOLD signal time courses, demonstrating significant effects in the ANOVAs. Before correlations were carried out, the pre‐video baseline subjective rating was subtracted from each video and post‐video rating for each session. The neutral session ratings were then subtracted from the drug cue session ratings. This was to ensure both the fMRI and subjective rating data reflected drug cue session changes from baseline minus neutral session changes from baseline (fMRI data already in this format after first‐level analysis). Finally, the fMRI BOLD signal data were averaged over 3‐minute intervals to reflect the 3‐minute interval of subjective rating presentation during each session. Correlational analyses were carried out between each individual's subjective rating and ROI BOLD signal time courses using Pearson's product moment correlation coefficient. Resultant correlation coefficients were Fisher's z‐transformed and entered into one‐sample t‐tests to determine group level significance.