Title.
The brain's functional connectome in young children with prenatal alcohol exposure.
Abstract.
Highlights.
We used fMRI to study young children with prenatal alcohol exposure (PAE).
We measured the functional connectome and its stability within and across participants.
The PAE group had similar graph theory metrics to controls.
The PAE group, but not controls, had increasing intra-participant stability with age.
Controls, but not the PAE group, had increasing inter-participant stability with age.
Prenatal alcohol exposure (PAE) can lead to altered brain function and structure, as well as lifelong cognitive, behavioral, and mental health difficulties. Previous research has shown reduced brain network efficiency in older children and adolescents with PAE, but no imaging studies have examined brain differences in young children with PAE, at an age when cognitive and behavioral problems often first become apparent. The present study aimed to investigate the brain's functional connectome in young children with PAE using passive viewing fMRI. We analyzed 34 datasets from 26 children with PAE aged 2–7 years and 215 datasets from 87 unexposed typically-developing children in the same age range. The whole brain functional connectome was constructed using functional connectivity analysis across 90 regions for each dataset. We examined intra- and inter-participant stability of the functional connectome, graph theoretical measurements, and their correlations with age. Children with PAE had similar inter- and intra-participant stability to controls. However, children with PAE, but not controls, showed increasing intra-participant stability with age, suggesting a lack of variability of intrinsic brain activity over time. Inter-participant stability increased with age in controls but not in children with PAE, indicating more variability of brain function across the PAE population. Global graph metrics were similar between children with PAE and controls, in line with previous studies in older children. This study characterizes the functional connectome in young children with PAE for the first time, suggesting that the increased brain variability seen in older children develops early in childhood, when participants with PAE fail to show the expected age-related increases in inter-individual stability.
Introduction.
Children with prenatal alcohol exposure (PAE) can have difficulties with language, attention, learning, and behavior compared to unexposed children. Structural magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) studies have shown brain alterations underlying these difficulties in children with PAE, including decreased total brain volume, increased and decreased cortical thickness, and altered white matter microstructure (lower fractional anisotropy and/or higher mean diffusivity). Functional MRI studies show that PAE is associated with altered functional connectivity at rest in infants, children and youth, and adults, as well as both increased and decreased functional connectivity within brain networks during working memory tasks. However, no MRI studies have examined brain functional connectivity in young children with PAE (i.e., 2–6 years). Cognitive and behavioral problems in individuals with PAE can persist throughout life, but often first become apparent in early childhood. Identifying emerging differences in brain function during this critical stage is important to understanding the origins of later abnormalities.
Recently, the use of graph-theory based analysis to study brain development has attracted attention. This approach constructs a connectivity matrix representing brain regions and their structural or functional connections with each other, and then quantifies the topological features of this connectivity matrix, or graph. An increasing number of studies have investigated the development of the brain's functional connectome from infancy to adulthood. While functional brain abnormalities are evident in school-age children and youth with PAE, very little previous research has investigated how PAE alters the brain's functional connectome. One previous study showed reduced global efficiency and higher path length in youth aged 10–17 years with PAE compared to unexposed controls. A second study in a different sample (aged 7–17 years) found no differences in global brain metrics, but noted substantially more atypical values of global efficiency, clustering coefficient and characteristic path length in the PAE group than in controls. Functional connectome analysis has demonstrated whole brain network alterations in other neurodevelopmental disorders, and shows potential in clinical diagnosis and intervention. A better understanding of the functional connectome in young children with PAE would provide a more complete picture of the effects of PAE at the whole-brain level and potentially help inform future research on interventions.
In the present study, we aimed to investigate the functional connectome of young children with PAE using passive viewing fMRI. Unlike resting state fMRI that requires participants to lie still for several minutes with minimalm stimulus, passive viewing fMRI allows participant to watch videos during their scan. Because it provides a more natural condition, passive viewing can decrease head motion during data collection, and it is increasingly used in children. Several previous studies have successfully examined brain activity, variability, and/or network development using naturalistic-viewing fMRI, including in young children. Passive viewing fMRI has also been applied to young children and older adults with major depressive disorder and adults with autism spectrum disorder (ASD). Here, we examined functional connectome measures including network efficiency and centrality, as well as inter- and intra-individual stability. We expected that young children with PAE would show decreased network efficiency and increased network path length compared to exposed controls, as seen in older childhood. Previous studies have not examined inter- or intra-participant stability in children with PAE, but based on higher rates of atypical metrics seen in older children with PAE and higher variability in behavior, we expected to see lower inter- and intra-participant stability in the PAE group.
Materials and methods.
Participants.
This study recruited 52 children with PAE (26 males/26 females, aged 2.78 to 7.22 years) from Alberta, Canada. Participants with PAE were recruited via advertisements (print and online) in newsletters and parent groups (n = 18), early intervention services and diagnostic clinics (n = 25), and through Child and Family Services (n = 9). PAE was confirmed via child welfare files (containing information from birth families), social workers, police records, medical files, and semi-structured interviews with caregivers and birth families, where possible. No participants had been diagnosed with fetal alcohol spectrum disorder (FASD), the developmental disorder associated with PAE, because they are too young to be assessed in most diagnostic clinics in Alberta, which typically see children only after they are 7-years old. 153 unexposed typically-developing children (82 males/71 females; aged 1.97 to 8.04 years) were included from an ongoing study of typical brain development. These typically-developing controls were originally recruited from the Calgary community via advertisements and from the Alberta Pregnancy Outcomes and Nutrition (APrON) study, an ongoing research study that recruited women in pregnancy and is focused on child outcomes related to maternal nutrition and mental health in pregnancy. For recruitment details for the APrON study, please refer to. The absence of prenatal alcohol exposure in controls was verified by maternal report at multiple stages of pregnancy.
The study was originally planned with a longitudinal design, and all participants’ families were invited to return for subsequent scans approximately every six months before school age, and annually thereafter. After removing scans with severe head motion (see details in Data preprocessing), unfinished scans (any fMRI scans with < 250 vol), and scans where participants were asleep, a total of 249 fMRI datasets (215 datasets from 87 control participants, 34 datasets from 26 participants with PAE, less head motion, non-sleep and full 250 vol) were included in the present study (Table 1). Because data collection from the children with PAE began after the control data collection, fewer participants with PAE had multiple scans.
Parents or legal guardians of all participants provided written informed consent, and all participants provided verbal assent. The study was approved by the conjoint health research ethics board at the University of Calgary.
MRI parameters.
Imaging was conducted on a GE 3T MR750w (General Electric, Waukesha, WI) scanner equipped with a 32-channel head-coil at the Alberta Children’s Hospital in Calgary, Canada. Children were not sedated, and were watching a movie of their choice for the entire duration of the MRI scan. Headphones were equipped to receive movie audio and to communicate with scanning staff. T1-weighted data acquisition used an FSPGR BRAVO sequence with flip angle = 12º, 210 slices, TR = 8.23 ms, TE = 3.76 ms, voxel size = 0.9 × 0.9 × 0.9 mm, matrix size = 512 × 512, inversion time = 540 ms. Data acquisition for fMRI used a gradient- echo-planar imaging (EPI) sequence with TR = 2 s, TE = 30 ms, flip angle = 60º, 36 slices, voxel size = 3.59 × 3.59 × 3.6 mm, matrix size = 64 × 64, 250 vol, total scan time 8:10 min. The entire protocol including other modalities lasted 45–60 min, depending on whether sequences needed to be repeated. In some cases, children requested that the scan be stopped, or they were moving too much to collect high quality data, and the scan was stopped early.
Data preprocessing.
Data preprocessing was completed in AFNI and FSL. Each participant's T1-weighted image was skull stripped and segmented into gray matter, white matter, and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) images and co-registered to their individual fMRI space. Total brain volume was calculated as the sum of gray and white matter volumes and used as a covariate due to its potential effect on the graph measures. The first 10 volumes of the passive viewing fMRI data were removed to allow for environmental adaptation and signal stabilization; 240 volumes remained. Correction of slice timing and head motion were performed. The averaged relative frame-wise displacement (FD) was calculated for further analysis. A 36-parameter matrix was created from the averaged signals from the individual whole brain mask, CSF mask, white matter mask, the six head motion parameters, and their temporal derivatives and quadratic term signals. A spike matrix was created from volumes that had high relative FD (> 0.3 mm). Then the combination of the 36-parameter matrix and the spike matrix were regressed out of the fMRI signals. Datasets with spike volumes longer than 4 min (i.e., less than 4 min of low-motion data) were excluded from the study. Finally, the residual fMRI signals were band-pass filtered (0.009 to 0.08 Hz), underwent linear-trend removal, spatially transformed to MNI standard space using a pediatric template aged from 4.5 to 8.5 years, and spatially smoothed with a 4 mm full width at half maximum kernel. Slice timing, head motion correction, T1-weighted image segmentation, head motion outlier detection, co-registration, and spatial normalization and smoothing were done in FSL. Regression of the nuisance signals, band-pass filtering and linear trend removal were done using AFNI version AFNI_17.3.03.
Functional connectome constructions.
We used an adapted version of the stability analysis performed by Vanderwal and colleagues to investigate intra-individual stability of the functional connectome. This analysis involved splitting the fMRI signal into two halves for each participant and comparing the similarity between halves. To complete this, each participant's fMRI time series was split into two equal datasets with 120 time points each. Each half of the dataset, as well as the entire dataset (all time points), were separately run through the following functional connectome analysis in AFNI. The Automated Anatomical Labeling (AAL) template was used to subdivide each participant's brain into 90 regions excluding the cerebellum. The average time series was calculated within each AAL region, and then Pearson's correlation coefficients were calculated between the averaged time series of each pair of AAL regions and transformed to Fisher's z scores to create a 90 × 90 connectivity matrix for each dataset (Fig. 1a). Thus, three connectivity matrices were produced for each participant: one on the first half of their data, one on the second half, and one for the entire dataset.
Analysis of the functional connectome.
First, we examined intra-participant stability during movie watching by correlating connectivity matrices from the first and the second halves of the dataset for each participant (Fig. 1a). Correlation coefficients were transformed to Fisher's z scores and a permutation comparison test was performed between the PAE and control groups. Age, sex, head motion (i.e., averaged relative FD), and total brain volume were included as covariates. Linear correlations between age and the intra-participant stability metric were calculated for each group with sex, head motion, and total brain volume as covariates.
Second, inter-individual stability was examined within each group (Fig. 1b). Pearson's correlation coefficients were calculated between each subject's whole connectivity matrix and that of every other participant in the same group (i.e., PAE or controls). Then a 215 × 215 correlation matrix for the unexposed control group and a 34 × 34 correlation matrix for the PAE group were generated, and the average value of each row was calculated to generate an inter-individual stability value for each person in each dataset. A permutation comparison test was performed between the inter-individual stability of two groups with age, sex, head motion, and total brain volume as covariates. The relationship between inter-individual stability and age was examined with sex, head motion, and total brain volume as covariates.
Graph-theory based metrics calculation.
As in previous studies, the graph theoretical measurements were calculated for the thresholded and binarized individual connectivity matrix of the whole time series. The threshold of the matrix was set at r = 0.17 as p < 0.01. The graph theoretic metrics (global and nodal level of clustering coefficient, shortest path length, small-worldness, local efficiency, global efficiency, betweenness centrality and network degree centrality) were calculated for each binary matrix using the GRETNA toolbox. Clustering coefficient measures the connection density among all neighbors of each node; shortest path length measures the fastest pathway to transfer information between any pair of nodes; sigma characterizes the ratio between clustering coefficient and shortest path length compared with the random networks; local efficiency measures the efficiency of transferring information from each node and its neighbors; global efficiency measures the efficiency of transferring information from each node to all other nodes in the whole graph, with higher efficiency indicating that fewer pathways are required to reach to other nodes in the network; betweenness centrality measures the intensity of the shortest pathway that passes each node; degree centrality measures the number of the connections of each node. Permutation tests between the two groups for each metric were performed controlling for age, sex, head motion, and total brain volume. The threshold for nodal metrics was set at p < 0.05. For completeness, we report results both uncorrected and corrected using false discovery rate (FDR) for multiple comparisons. We also analyzed metrics for linear correlations with age, and for group-age interactions. All permutation tests were performed in the GRETNA toolbox. The nodal level results were displayed by BrainNet Viewer toolbox.