Title.
Altered functional connectivity of the nucleus accumbens subdivisions in amphetamine-type stimulant abusers: a resting-state fMRI study.
Abstract.
Background.
The growing abuse of amphetamine-type stimulants leads to new challenges to human health. A possible addiction mechanism has been proposed by altered functional architecture of the nucleus accumbens (NAc) during resting state. NAc contains different subdivisions and they may play different roles in addiction. The aim of the present study was to examine whether there are common or distinct patterns of functional connectivity of the NAc subdivisions in amphetamine-type stimulant abusers (ATSAs).
Methods.
The present study recruited 17 male ATSAs and 22 healthy male controls. All the subjects underwent resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) with their eyes closed. The NAc was divided into core-like and shell-like subdivisions. We used seed-based resting-state functional connectivity (RSFC) analyses to identify differences in brain functional architecture between ATSAs and healthy controls (HCs).
Results.
ATSAs had lower positive RSFCs with all of the NAc subdivisions over the left orbital part of superior frontal gyrus and higher positive RSFCs with the NAc subdivisions over the left opercular part of inferior frontal gyrus than HCs, which indicates common abnormalities across the NAc subdivisions in ATSAs. In addition, the RSFCs between the NAc subdivisions and the left orbital part of superior frontal gyrus were negatively correlated with the addiction severity in ATSAs.
Conclusion.
These results provide evidence that there are common RSFC patterns of the NAc subdivisions in ATSAs. The abnormality indicated by disrupted functional connectivity between the NAc subdivisions and prefrontal cortex suggests abnormal interaction between the rewarding process and cognitive control in ATSAs. Our results shed insight on the neurobiological mechanisms of ATSA and suggest potential novel therapeutic targets for treatment and intervention of ATSAs.
Background.
Drug addiction is one of the major health problems in the current society. The main feature of drug addiction is the inability to resist one's urge to obtain and take addictive drugs even though it can cause serious negative consequences. Worldwide, the abuse of amphetamine-type stimulants is a global and growing phenomenon. In China, the proportion of amphetamine-type stimulants abusers (ATSAs) is continuously increasing over the past several years. Drug addiction is often related to altered functional architecture in the brain, which results in hypersensitivity to the drug and drug-related cues and further ensures the compulsive drug-seeking behavior.
Recent neuroimaging studies have indicated the significant functions of the reward system in drug addiction. One of the main brain regions underlying addiction is the nucleus accumbens (NAc), a brain nucleus well recognized as a center of rewarding processes. Elevated dopamine transmission in the NAc is thought to be a primary mediator of drug addiction. Besides, the NAc is a major input structure of the basal ganglia, thus it can integrate information from cortical and limbic regions and further modulate goal-directed behaviors. The NAc plays a pivotal role in refining action selection and mediating the rewarding effects of drugs abuse. Therefore, it is generally thought that chronic exposure to addictive drugs disrupts the plasticity of the NAc, producing a pathologic motivation for addictive drug seeking.
Resting-state functional connectivity (RSFC) is shown to provide a measure of the brain’s functional organization. Some researchers have studied the RSFC in substance-dependent populations, including individuals addicted to heroin, nicotine, and cocaine. These resting-state fMRI findings provide evidence that regions related to reward and cognitive control are involved in addiction. A possible mechanism for drug addiction has been proposed by disrupted functional connectivity of the NAc in resting state. It has been shown that the RSFC of NAc, especially its interaction with the prefrontal cortices, was related to impulsive behavior. Exposures to addictive cues could decrease its RSFC to the prefrontal lobe. Further, the disrupted RSFC of NAc and prefrontal cortical regions has been reported in substance use disorder. These findings demonstrate that drug addiction might be associated with altered functional connectivity between the NAc that involved in rewarding process and prefrontal cortical regions that involved in cognitive behavioral control processes.
Although functional connectivity of the NAc has been examined in drug addiction, no study has been conducted to investigate the functional connectivity of the NAc subdivisions. Numerous studies confirmed multi-aspect heterogeneity of the NAc, resulting the most intensely investigated shell-core dichotomy in animal models. In human neuroimaging, multimodal connectivity-based parcellation also reveals a shell-core dichotomy of the human NAc. The shell-like and core-like subdivisions of NAc were both found to facilitate the selection of the best reward functionally, but promote different patterns of behavior. The shell-like subdivision, located in the ventromedial NAc, plays a role in the selection of the best reward by suppressing non- or less rewards stimuli that may obstruct with the best reward predicting stimuli. The core-like subdivision, located in the dorsolateral NAc, plays a role in the selection of the best reward by selectively stimulating incentive stimuli that are associated with the best reward. All these researches indicate the dissociable roles of the NAc subdivisions to some extent. For now, no study has investigated the functional roles that different subdivisions of NAc may play in ATSA. Thus, it is not clear whether there are common changes of the RSFC across the different NAc subdivisions or distinct changes for each subdivision underlying the mechanism of addiction. The recently proposed data-driven NAc subdivision template in humans makes it possible to evaluate the RSFC of each NAc subdivision in patients with ATSA, which will be important to shed light on the mechanisms of ATSA.
In brief, the RSFC of the NAc subdivisions in drug addiction has not been previously studied in addictive individuals. Therefore, this study aimed at investigating whether there are any addiction related alterations in RSFC of the NAc subdivisions by acquiring resting-state fMRI data from ATSAs and healthy controls (HCs). Previous studies emphasized the importance of the abnormal interactions between the NAc that process reward and prefrontal cortical regions that govern the cognitive-behavioral control in the mechanism of addiction, thus we hypothesized that the RSFCs between the NAc subdivisions and the prefrontal cortices were consistently altered among ATSAs. Meanwhile, considering the multi-aspect heterogeneity of the NAc, the regionally-dependent changes in RSFC of the NAc subdivisions may be revealed in ATSAs.
Materials and methods.
Subjects.
Male ATSAs (n = 17) were recruited from the Wuhan Mental Health Centre affiliated with the Huazhong University of Science and Technology during the period from October 2012 to December 2012. Healthy male controls (n = 22) were recruited from the local community and Huazhong University of Science and Technology by advertisements. The inclusion criteria for both groups were as follows: 18–40 years of age, male, at least 9 years of education, normal or corrected-to-normal hearing and vision, and no reported history of neurological problems, ophthalmic diseases, or severe head injuries. All enrolled ATSAs met the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual for Mental Disorders, 4th Edition (DSM-IV) criteria for drug dependence and were assessed using the Chinese version of the Addiction Severity Index (ASI-C). Clinicians assessed each participant’s addiction severity on seven areas: medical, employment/support status, alcohol, drug, legal, family/social, and psychiatric by using a 0–9 Likert scale. A higher score indicates a more serious problem. The addiction severity of drugs was labeled as ASID. Furthermore, the enrolled ATSA participants all had used amphetamine-type stimulants for more than one year, and the accumulated dosage of the amphetamine-type stimulants they used was above 50 g. Based on self-reports of these abusers, among the 17 ATSAs, 8 participants used methamphetamine only and 9 participants used two or three amphetamine-type stimulants, such as methamphetamine, ecstasy or ketamine. None of the ATSAs and HCs had a history of abuse or dependence on other substances, with the exceptions of nicotine, caffeine, and alcohol. All of the ATSAs were inpatients, so they were in a state of withdrawal from any substance. They didn’t take any medicine or other treatment during hospitalization. One ATSA and one HC subject were later excluded from the study because of excessive head motion during the fMRI scan. This study was approved by the Ethics Committee of Wuhan Mental Health Centre. All participants or families of ATSAs provided written informed consent before participation.
MRI data acquisition.
Images were acquired with a 1.5 Tesla MRI scanner (Model: GE Signa HDxt) in Zhongshan Hospital, Wuhan City, Hubei Province, China. Whole-brain functional scans were collected using an echo-planar imaging (EPI) sequence (repetition time = 3000 ms; echo time = 40 ms; flip angle = 90°; matrix = 64 × 64; field of view = 220 × 220 mm2; number of slices = 33; slice thickness = 3 mm; slice gap = 1 mm). Each functional run contained 180 volumes. High-resolution T1-weighted images were acquired in a sagittal orientation employing a fast SPGR sequence (repetition/echo time = 9.176/2.956 ms; flip angle = 20°; slice thickness = 1.2 mm (no gap); number of slices = 128).
Data preprocessing.
Image preprocessing was performed using the Data Processing Assistant for Resting-State fMRI (DPARSF_v4.4, https://rfmri.org/DPARSF), the Statistical Parametric Mapping (SPM12) program (https://www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm), and the Resting-State fMRI Data Analysis Toolkit (REST 1.8, https://www.restfmri.net). Before preprocessing, we discarded the first 10 volumes to allow for signal stabilization. The remaining volumes were corrected for differences in slice acquisition times and then realigned to correct for small movements that occurred between scans. Subjects with a maximum displacement of more than 3 mm (in the x, y, or z direction) or more than 3° of angular rotation about any axis for any of the 170 volumes were excluded from the study. One ATSA and one HC were excluded from the analyses based on the recorded motion correction estimates. The realigned EPI images were coregistered to individual T1-weighted structural images. The locations of the NAc subdivisions in normalized T1 images for each subject can be seen in Additional file 1: Figure S1 and S2. Then the transformed structural images were segmented into gray matter, white matter, and cerebrospinal fluid. Several sources of variance were removed from the realigned data by regression of nuisance variables, including 24 motion parameters (6 head motion parameters, 6 head motion parameters one time point before, and the 12 corresponding squared items), the signal averaged over the individual segmented cerebrospinal fluid and white matter (WM) regions, linear and quadratic trends. The resulting maps were then registered into MNI space with 2 × 2 × 2 mm3 cubic voxels using the transformation information acquired from T1 image unified segmentation. A smoothing kernel of 4 mm was applied after registration. Finally, temporal filtering (0.01–0.1 Hz) of the time series was performed. To characterize differences in in-scanner microhead motion, the mean frame-wise displacement (FD), which includes measures of voxel-wise differences in motion in its derivation, was used as a measure of the micro-head motion of each subject.
Definition of the regions of interest.
Using neuroanatomy and histochemistry, the differentiation of the NAc subregions has been extensively studied, yielding a widely-accepted dichotomic shell/core-like subdivisions that reflect dissociable roles respectively. Recently, to investigate the regional differentiation within the NAc, Xia et al. used three complementary parcellation schemes based on tractography, RSFC, and task-dependent co-activation and found that the 2-cluster solution with shell/core architecture provided the best description of the data. The clusters generated in this solution across the three parcellation schemes were defined as the final parcels. In our study, the subdivisions of the NAc derived from RSFC patterns of these parcels were chosen as the regions of interests for further functional connectivity analyses (Fig. 1).
RSFC analyses.
The seed-based RSFC of the four subdivisions of the NAc was analyzed. By averaging the time series of all of the voxels within the seed region, the mean time series of each seed region was acquired. Pearson’s correlation coefficients were computed between the mean time series of the seed region and time series of each voxel of the whole brain. The correlation coefficients were converted into z-values using Fisher’s r-to-z transformation in order to improve their normality. The z-values were analyzed by one-sample t-tests to identify brain regions that exhibited significant positive or negative correlations with the seed region within each group (voxel-wise p < 0.001, cluster-wise FWE p < 0.05). Finally, the z-values were analyzed by two-sample t-tests to identify brain regions that exhibited significant differences in connectivity with the seed region between the ATSA group and HC group while accounting for the confounding effects of the education level, age and Jenkinson’s mean FD. The statistical threshold of the two-sample t-test was set at voxel-wise p < 0.001 in conjunction with a cluster-wise FWE p < 0.0125 to correct for multiple comparisons [p < 0.0125 was selected to take in account the number of independent seed regions used (0.0125 = 0.05/4)].
Availability of data and materials.
The datasets used and/or analyzed during the current study are available from the corresponding author on reasonable request.
Ethics approval and consent to participate.
This study was approved by the Ethics Committee of Wuhan Mental Health Centre. All participants or families of ATSAs provided informed consent before participation.
Consent for publication.
Not applicable.