Title.
Transdiagnostic Effects of Ventromedial Prefrontal Cortex Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation on Cue Reactivity.
Abstract.
BACKGROUND.
Elevated frontal and striatal reactivity to drug cues is a transdiagnostic hallmark of substance use disorders. The goal of these experiments was to determine if it is possible to decrease frontal and striatal reactivity to drug cues in both cocaine users and heavy alcohol users through continuous theta burst stimulation (cTBS) to the left ventromedial prefrontal cortex (VMPFC).
METHODS.
Two single-blinded, within-subject, active sham–controlled experiments were performed wherein neural reactivity to drug/alcohol cues versus neutral cues was evaluated immediately before and after receiving real or sham cTBS (110% resting motor threshold, 3600 pulses, Fp1 location; N= 49: 25 cocaine users [experiment 1], 24 alcohol users [experiment 2]; 196 total functional magnetic resonance imaging scans). Generalized psychophysiological interaction and three-way repeated-measures analysis of variance were used to evaluate cTBS-induced changes in drug cue-associated functional connectivity between the left VMPFC and eight regions of interest: ventral striatum, left and right caudate, left and right putamen, left and right insula, and anterior cingulate cortex.
RESULTS.
In both experiments, there was a significant interaction between treatment (real/sham) and time (pre/post). In both experiments, cue-related functional connectivity was significantly attenuated following real cTBS versus sham cTBS. There was no significant interaction with region of interest for either experiment.
CONCLUSIONS.
This is the first sham-controlled investigation to demonstrate, in two populations, that VMPFC cTBS can attenuate neural reactivity to drug and alcohol cues in frontostriatal circuits. These results provide an empirical foundation for future clinical trials that may evaluate the efficacy, durability, and clinical implications of VMPFC cTBS to treat addictions.
Elevated neural reactivity to drug cues is a common feature of substance use disorders (SUDs) and has been evaluated as a potential biomarker for predicting relapse to drug use. Across multiple drug-using populations, cue exposure leads to elevated activity in frontostriatal and frontolimbic neural circuits involved in reward processing and salience. These regions include the ventromedial prefrontal cortex (VMPFC), ventral and dorsal striatum, anterior cingulate cortex (ACC), and anterior insula. This has been demonstrated in cocaine users, alcohol users, nicotine users, marijuana users, and opioid users.
One promising new area of research in addiction treatment development has been transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS). Food and Drug Administration–approved as a treatment for depression, TMS is a noninvasive brain stimulation technique that takes advantage of the ability of electromagnetic induction to induce neural activity in the cortex and, by extension, in subcortical regions through monosynaptic afferent projections. Repetitive TMS (rTMS) produces frequency-dependent changes in neural activity, with high-frequency stimulation typically inducing long-term potentiation of cortical excitability and low-frequency stimulation inducing long-term depression of cortical excitability. Theta burst stimulation (TBS), a patterned form of rTMS, is based on a rhythmic bursting pattern; it has been used to induce plasticity in preclinical preparations and can selectively increase or decrease cortical excitability in a neural circuit–specific manner in humans.
Prior studies from our lab have shown that single pulses of TMS to the left frontal pole induce a significant change in brain activity (as measured by the blood oxygen level–dependent signal) in the VMPFC and the striatum. This has been demonstrated through the use of interleaved TMS and functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) in healthy, cocaine-dependent, and alcohol-dependent individuals. Furthermore, when continuous TBS (cTBS), an inhibitory form of rTMS, is applied to the VMPFC in cocaine users, there is a selective attenuation of TMS-evoked activity in the VMPFC, striatum, ACC, and insula. This paradigm was also associated with a reduction in cocaine craving. When VMPFC cTBS is applied to alcohol users, there is also a significant attenuation of neural activity in these regions, suggesting that cTBS has transdiagnostic effects on frontostriatolimbic circuitry.
While VMPFC cTBS appears to attenuate TMS-evoked activity in craving-related circuitry, it is not yet clear, however, if these effects generalize to behaviorally relevant engagement of this circuit, such as during drug/alcohol cue exposure. The goal of the present study was to determine if cTBS to the VMPFC could reduce the brain response to drug cues (experiment 1) and alcohol cues (experiment 2). Additionally, by uniting these datasets, we sought to test the hypothesis that cTBS would have similar (transdiagnostic) attenuating effects on cue reactivity in these groups.
To achieve these goals, we performed two single-blinded, active sham–controlled brain imaging and TMS experiments wherein fMRI scans were acquired immediately before and after a session of real or sham VMPFC cTBS in a cohort of individuals with cocaine use disorder (experiment 1) and alcohol use disorder (experiment 2), respectively. While 600 pulses of cTBS was the original dose observed to produce long-term depression–like effects in the primary motor cortex, for this study, 3600 pulses was chosen as our cTBS dose given that the Food and Drug Administration–approved protocol for depression treatment involves 3000 pulses/session at 10 Hz, and recent studies from our laboratory have demonstrated that 3600 pulses to the left VMPFC can decrease VMPFC connectivity to the ventral striatum, caudate, putamen, and orbitofrontal cortex in cocaine users and alcohol users. All individuals received real and sham VMPFC cTBS (across two different sessions, 3600 pulses of cTBS per session; four fMRI scans per individual; 49 participants total; 196 fMRI scans total). We hypothesized that VMPFC cTBS would attenuate drug/alcohol cue–related functional connectivity (FC) within frontostriatal circuitry (VMPFC-ventral striatum, caudate, putamen), as well as nodes of the salience network (i.e., ACC, anterior insula) typically engaged by drug cues.
METHODS AND MATERIALS.
Experiment 1 (Cocaine Users) and Experiment 2 (Heavy Alcohol Users).
Participants..
Non–treatment-seeking cocaine-dependent individuals (n = 25) and alcohol-dependent individuals (n = 24) were recruited from the Charleston, South Carolina, metropolitan area to participate in one of two single-blinded, active sham–controlled crossover studies. These studies were independent but were run in parallel by the same study coordinator using the same TMS equipment and facilities. Following informed consent procedures approved by the Medical University of South Carolina Institutional Review Board, participants completed screening assessments related to MRI and TMS protocol safety, mental status, and drug use to determine study eligibility (see Supplemental Methods for detailed inclusion/exclusion information).
Eligible participants completed two MRI/rTMS visits (each ~1 hour). Before each study session, a multipanel urine drug screen (QuikVue 6-panel urine drug screen; Quidel, San Diego, CA) was given. Participants were told ahead of time that if they had positive urine drug screen for (meth) amphetamine, opiates, marijuana, or benzodiazepines they would not be eligible to participate on that day and that they would have one opportunity to reschedule. In this study, none of the participants had to reschedule for a positive urine drug screen. All participants received both real and sham VMPFC cTBS (one type per session) and were counterbalanced for the order in which they received stimulation (Fp1 landmark based on the International 10–20 system; 110% resting motor threshold [rMT]; six sessions of cTBS for each visit; 3600 pulses total, with a 60-second break after the first 1800 pulses). Visit 2 occurred between 7 and 14 days after visit 1. fMRI drug/alcohol cue reactivity task data were collected immediately before and after cTBS stimulation (Figure 1), with the fMRI scan initiated within 20 minutes of receiving real or sham cTBS and completed no later than 40 minutes after cTBS to maximize presumed effects of cTBS on cortical activity. Self-reported cocaine or alcohol craving (respectively) was assessed at five time points: upon visit initiation, before the baseline fMRI scan, before the cTBS session, immediately after cTBS, and after the second fMRI scan.
Procedures: Clinical Assessments..
Self-report assessments included the Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV, Timeline Followback [for cocaine, alcohol, marijuana, and nicotine ], Alcohol Use Disorders Identification Test, Fagerström Smoking Inventory, Beck Depression Inventory-II, and State-Trait Anxiety Inventory. Timeline Followback was used to evaluate past week’s substance use at all study visits. As typically done in cue-induced craving studies, study personnel ensured that craving levels were at or below baseline before participants were dismissed from each visit.
Procedures: Drug/Alcohol Cue Reactivity fMRI Task..
The drug/alcohol cue reactivity task that has been used by our group in the past was administered in the MRI scanner as a block design using E-Prime 2 software (Psychology Software Tools, Inc., Sharpsburg, PA). The total task time was 12 minutes and consisted of six 120-second epochs. Each epoch included alternating 24-second blocks of four task conditions: drug, neutral, blur, and rest. Respectively, these task conditions included images of cocaine- or alcohol-related stimuli customized for each group (e.g., crack pipe for cocaine users, liquor bottles for alcohol users), neutral stimuli (e.g., glass of water, cooking utensils, people eating dinner), blurred stimuli acting as visual controls by matching substance images in color and hue, and a fixation cross for alert rest periods. During each task block, five images were presented (4.8 seconds).
Procedures: Neuroimaging Acquisition..
Participants were scanned using a Siemens 3.0T TIM Trio (Siemens Corp., Erlangen, Germany) MRI scanner with a 32-channel head coil. High-resolution T1-weighted structural images were acquired using a magnetization prepared rapid acquisition gradient-echo sequence (repetition time/echo time = 1900 ms/2.34 ms; field of view = 220 mm; matrix = 256 × 256 voxels; 192 slices; slice thickness = 1.0 mm with no gap; final resolution = 1-mm3 voxels). Functional images were acquired with a multislice gradient-echo echo-planar imaging (EPI) sequence (repetition time/echo time = 2200 ms/35 ms; field of view = 192 mm; matrix = 64 × 64 voxels; 36 slices; slice thickness = 3 mm with no gap; final resolution = 3 mm3 voxels). Each functional run consisted of 328 time points.
Procedures: cTBS Protocol—Real and Sham cTBS..
Coil position was determined using standardized coordinates from the International 10–20 system (with Fp1 corresponding to the left VMPFC stimulation target). The location and orientation of each participant’s coil placement was indicated on a nylon cap that participants wore throughout visit 1 and both MRI/rTMS sessions. Participants’ rMT was identified via the standardized Parametric Estimation by Sequential Testing procedure. The cTBS was administered with a figure-of-eight Cool-B65 A/P coil (MagVenture, Farum, Denmark). Participants received two 2-minute trains of cTBS over Fp1 (one train = 120 seconds; three pulse bursts at 5 Hz; 15 pulses/s; 1800 pulses/train; 60-second intertrain interval; 110% rMT) (see Supplemental Methods for details of rigorous active sham). To enhance tolerability, stimulation intensity was gradually escalated in 5% increments (from 80% to 110% rMT) over the first 30 seconds of each train.
Procedures: Cue Recollection During cTBS Administration..
Before cTBS administration, participants were asked to recall the last time they used cocaine or alcohol (respectively) and, using a series of standardized questions from traditional Narrative Exposure Therapy practice, they were asked to describe the place they were using, a visual description of the scene, and a description of the sensory properties of the drug including taste, smell, and sensation. During cTBS administration, the participants were primed every 20 seconds to “Think about that scene you described wherein you were last using cocaine/alcohol” (paraphrased so as to be tailored to the participant’s description).
Data Analysis.
Self-reported Craving..
Self-reported craving scores were entered into a two-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) (treatment type [real/sham] × time [pre/post]) and subsequent t tests to determine the effect of treatment on changes in craving.
Neuroimaging Preprocessing..
MRI data were preprocessed using standard protocols via SPM12 (Wellcome Department of Cognitive Neurology, London, United Kingdom) implemented in MATLAB 7.14 (The MathWorks, Inc., Natick, MA) (see Supplemental Methods for preprocessing details). Data analyses were conducted on a total of 49 participants (30 men; mean age = 34 ± 11 years; age range = 21–54 years) (see Table 1 for detailed demographics).
Generalized Psychophysiological Interaction..
Generalized psychophysiological interaction (gPPI) was used to investigate task-modulated patterns of FC between the VMPFC and eight regions of interest (ROIs) during the drug/alcohol cue reactivity task. gPPI was conducted as described by McLaren et al. (see Supplemental Methods for gPPI analysis details). We computed drug/alcohol cue minus neutral cue “contrast betas” indicating the relative FC during drug versus neutral conditions. Four contrast betas were computed: prereal cTBS, postreal cTBS, presham, and postsham. We aimed to show that FC between the VMPFC and several striatal and salience regions would decrease during drug/alcohol cue versus neutral cue exposure following real but not sham VMPFC cTBS. To do this, we conducted a three-way repeated-measures ANOVA involving treatment type (real vs. sham), time (pre vs. post), and ROI as independent variables and drug/alcohol versus neutral contrast betas as the dependent variable. Subsequent t tests were then used to determine the effect of treatment on changes in drug/alcohol cue–evoked FC across regions.
The focus on FC analysis in the present study, rather than traditional general linear model analysis, was due to the nature of TMS effects on the brain. To influence subcortical brain regions (such as the striatum), we applied TMS to cortical targets (such as the VMPFC) and took advantage of the monosynaptic functional connections between cortical and subcortical regions. As such, we felt that measuring the efficacy of the cTBS-induced changes in frontostriatolimbic circuits should be conducted at the level of these functional connections.
Relationship Between Clinical/Demographic Variables and FC Changes..
To determine whether clinical and demographic variables influenced or predicted cTBS treatment outcomes, hierarchical multiple linear regressions were conducted with clinical and demographic variables of interest as the predictors and covariate predictors and changes in VMPFC FC after real versus sham cTBS as the outcome variable.
Scalp-to-Cortex Distance Measurement..
Given that the effects of TMS on cortical depolarization are proportional to the distance between the skull and cortex, we calculated the distance from the scalp to cortex on the transverse plane of magnetization prepared rapid acquisition gradient-echo images for each participant using BrainRuler software, a dedicated tool for scalp-to-cortex distance measurements. The average distance from participant-specific placement of Fp1 to the cortex was 17.4 ± 3.7 mm for cocaine users and 16.4 ± 3.2 mm for alcohol users. These distances were incorporated into the analyses as covariates.