Title.
Disrupted modulation of thalamus activation and thalamocortical connectivity during dual task performance in schizophrenia.
Abstract.
Despite considerable evidence showing thalamus anatomy and connectivity abnormalities in schizophrenia, how these abnormalities are reflected in thalamus function during cognition is relatively understudied. Modulation of thalamic connectivity with the prefrontal cortex (PFC) is required for higher-order cognitive processes, which are often impaired in schizophrenia. To address this gap, we investigated how thalamus function and thalamus-PFC connectivity under different levels of cognitive demand may be disrupted in schizophrenia. Participants underwent fMRI scanning while performing an event-related two-alternative forced choice task under Single and Dual task conditions. In the Single task condition, participants responded either to a visual cue with a well-learned motor response, or an audio cue with a well-learned vocal response. In the Dual task condition, participants performed both tasks. Thalamic connectivity with task relevant regions of the PFC for each condition was measured using beta-series correlation. Individuals with schizophrenia demonstrated less modulation of both mediodorsal thalamus activation and thalamus-PFC connectivity with increased cognitive demand. In contrast, their ability to modulate PFC function during task performance was maintained. These results suggest that the pathophysiology of cognitive impairment in schizophrenia is associated with thalamus-PFC circuitry and suggests that the thalamus, along with the PFC, should be a focus of investigation.
Introduction.
Abnormal function of the thalamus and thalamic connectivity with the prefrontal cortex (PFC) is thought to be fundamental to cognitive impairment in schizophrenia. There is considerable evidence that the structure and connectivity of the thalamus is abnormal in schizophrenia. However, few studies have investigated thalamic dysfunction during cognitive tasks. Several early studies found thalamic hypofunction in schizophrenia while performing verbal and spatial working memory tasks, attention tasks, prepulse inhibition and oddball tasks, though other studies have found thalamus hyperfunction while performing sensory gating tasks, word encoding tasks and target detection. These studies typically examined thalamic function during a cognitive task compared to baseline, rather than modulation by cognitive demand.
Thalamic hypofunction was more prominent during tasks with higher cognitive demand, such as tasks requiring mental updating or manipulation. In a modified Sternberg task, thalamic hypofunction was observed when manipulation of maintained information was required, but not while passively maintaining information. A recent study found thalamic hypofunction during encoding and maintenance, but not retrieval of spatial information. In contrast, thalamic hyperfunction was observed during sensory tasks. These thalamic findings are consistent with PFC dysfunction in schizophrenia, where a shifted inverted-U shaped curve is observed in patients, such that PFC hyperfunction is observed in high performing patients, or during easier tasks, and PFC hypofunction is observed in low performing patients, or during difficult tasks. In this study, we investigated modulation of thalamic function by cognitive demand in schizophrenia.
The thalamus is composed of multiple nuclei, with differentiable structure, function and connectivity patterns. Two thalamic nuclei have been particularly implicated during cognitive function; the mediodorsal nucleus (MD) and pulvinar (PUL). The MD has prominent anatomical connectivity with the PFC, and is central to various cognitive processes including working memory, attention and adaptive decision making (see for reviews). The PUL shows extensive connectivity with the posterior parietal cortex and is implicated in visual attention processes (see for review). Few functional studies of thalamic function in schizophrenia have investigated different regions of the thalamus during cognitive tasks. One study parcellated the thalamus into 7 regions of interest (ROIs) and investigated differential thalamic function of these regions during a visual working memory, intentional encoding and recognition tasks. This study found task-related thalamic hypofunction in the anterior and MD thalamus, but not similar changes in the PUL.
In recent years, there has been increasing evidence of reduced thalamus-PFC structural and functional connectivity at rest in schizophrenia (; see for review). In contrast, few studies have investigated task related connectivity changes in schizophrenia, though these studies have reported increased connectivity between the thalamus and PFC during verbal working memory. Both of these studies investigated the effect of task compared to baseline, and differences in methods used to calculate connectivity make it difficult to reconcile resting state related reduced and task related increased thalamus-PFC connectivity.
The present study used a dual task paradigm requiring participants to perform either one two-alternative forced choice task or two tasks simultaneously to investigate modulation of thalamic function and connectivity by cognitive demand in individuals with schizophrenia compared to healthy individuals. We examined activation and connectivity from the MD, PUL and the ventrolateral thalamus (VL), a thalamic region that is part of the striato-thalamo-frontal network involved in motor function. Importantly, we investigated thalamus-PFC connectivity modulation by different levels of cognitive demand in the same task, allowing us to use the same method for calculating connectivity. We hypothesized that patients would should show reduced modulation of PFC and thalamus activation, and thalamus-PFC connectivity by cognitive demand.
Method.
Participants.
Twenty-two patients with schizophrenia and 24 healthy individuals matched for age, gender, ethnicity and parental education participated in this study. 6 subjects (4 healthy; 2 schizophrenia) were excluded for incomplete data and one healthy individual was removed for excessive head motion. Thus, the final sample included 20 schizophrenia patients and 19 healthy individuals. Demographics for subjects included in the analyses are presented in Table 1. Schizophrenia participants were recruited from inpatient and outpatient services at the Vanderbilt Psychiatric Hospital in Nashville, Tennessee, and healthy participants were recruited from Nashville and the surrounding area through advertisement and word-of-mouth. Our schizophrenia sample consisted of 17 outpatients and 2 inpatients (data from 1 participant was not available). One patient was unmedicated and 2 were not receiving any antipsychotic medications. This study was approved by the Vanderbilt University Institutional Review Board and all participants provided written informed consent prior to participating in this study. All participants were administered the Structured Clinical Interview for Diagnosing DSM-IV Disorders (SCID:) to confirm diagnosis in patients and rule out current or past psychiatric illness in control subjects. Clinical symptoms in patients were quantified with the Positive and Negative Syndrome Scale (PANSS:). Premorbid IQ was estimated using the Wechsler Test of Adult Reading (WTAR:). Exclusion criteria included an estimated premorbid IQ of less than 70, age less than 18 or greater than 60, presence of a systemic medical illness (i.e. diabetes, cardiovascular or central nervous system disorder that would affect study participation, history of significant head trauma, reported pregnancy or lactation, history of substance abuse/dependence (3-months in patients; lifetime in controls), psychotropic drug use (in healthy individuals), and any MRI contraindications (e.g. metal implants, claustrophobia).
Task.
On each trial, participants performed either a visuo-motor task where a visual cue was mapped to a motor response, or an audio-vocal task where an audio cue was mapped to a vocal response (Single task condition), or both tasks with a 0 ms stimulus onset asynchrony (Dual task condition). Both visuo-motor and audio-vocal tasks were two-alternative forced choice tasks, mapping two stimuli to two responses. The visual stimuli were two greyscale male faces controlled for skin tone, hair color, neutral facial expression and hairline on a grey background. Participants responded to each face by pressing a button with either their right index or middle finger. The audio-vocal task consisted of two easily discriminable sounds (a complex tone and an edited natural sound) used previously in, each paired with a “Tay” or a “Koo” vocal response. On Single trials, one visual or auditory stimulus was presented for 200 ms, on Dual trials, both the visual and auditory stimuli were presented simultaneously. All trials were preceded by a 200 ms warning fixation and followed by a 12000 ms inter-trial interval (see Figure 1A for schematic). Participants completed a total of 5 runs while undergoing fMRI scanning with each run consisting of 12 Single (6 visuomotor and 6 audio-vocal) and 12 Dual trials.
Data acquisition.
Imaging data were collected on a 3T Philips Intera Achieva scanner located at the Vanderbilt University Institute of Imaging Science. High resolution T1 structural scans were collected with a 4.5 minute 3D T1 fast field echo sequence (170 slices, TR/TE = 8.9/4.6, FOV = 256 × 256 × 170 mm, matrix = 256 × 256 × 170, flip angle = 8°). Echo-planar imaging functional scans were collected while participants performed the behavioral task (38 slices, TR/TE = 2000/25 ms, FOV = 240 × 240 mm, matrix = 80 × 80, slice thickness = 3 mm with 0.3 mm gap, flip angle = 90°, volumes = 203).
Data analyses.
Neuroimaging preprocessing and subsequent analyses were carried out using SPM12 (version 7219) in Matlab (R2017b; MathWorks, USA). T1 structural images were skull stripped then segmented into grey and white matter tissue classes and normalized to MNI space using the CAT12 computational anatomy toolbox for SPM with default settings. Functional data underwent slice timing correction, motion correction followed by co-registration to the grey matter tissue segmentation. Deformation parameters from the structural normalization were then applied to all functional images, which were then smoothed with a 6 mm Gaussian kernel. For each subject, runs with motion larger than 3 mm in the x, y or z dimensions relative to the first volume in each run were excluded from further analysis. A total of 12 runs were excluded for excessive motion, with no subject having more than 2 of their 5 runs removed. A General Linear Model (GLM) was created for each subject with regressors defined separately for correct and incorrect Single and Dual trial onsets, convolved to a canonical hemodynamic response function. In addition, the model included covariates of no interest to account for the effect of 6 motion parameters (x, y, z, translation and roll, yaw and pitch). Vocal artifacts are limited to the first couple of seconds of responding and has limited effect on later hemodynamic response. For each individual, estimated parameters of the regressors (beta weights) were calculated for each voxel using the GLM and were used in t-tests to assess the main effect of correct Dual>Single trials. Within group analyses were conducted separately for healthy and schizophrenia groups using subject level Dual>Single contrast images. Between group analyses were investigated for the Dual>Single contrast images from each individual using subject as a random effect. This analysis identifies regions that show a condition by group interaction. As we were interested in how the two groups differ in task relevant brain regions, whole brain group comparisons were masked for the Dual>Single contrast, collapsed across all subjects (thresholded at p<0.05, uncorrected). For all masked analyses, we used small volume correction (SVC) to define cluster level significance. All contrasts used a voxel wise threshold of p<0.005 to detect cluster level significance.
Region-of-Interest Analysis: PFC and Thalamus.
To further investigate PFC activation and thalamus-PFC connectivity, we defined 4 PFC regions of interest (ROIs) based on task activations. First, a prefrontal cortex mask was created using the frontal pole, superior frontal gyrus, middle frontal gyrus, inferior frontal gyrus pars triangularis and pars opercularis ROIs from the Harvard-Oxford cortical atlas (; https://fsl.fmrib.ox.ac.uk/fsl/fslwiki/Atlases). All significant clusters in the Dual>Single contrast (collapsed across all subjects, p<0.05, FDRSVC) falling within this PFC mask were extracted. A total of 4 ROIs were defined this way. They included the midline (pre) supplementary motor area (pre-SMA/SMA; −4, 10, 56; 357 voxels), left frontal eye fields (FEF; −32, 0, 52; 367 voxels), right lateral PFC (LPFC; 42, 10, 24; 402 voxels) and the left LPFC (40, 15, 22; 97 voxels). For the all PFC ROI analyses, reported p-values were adjusted for Bonferroni corrected values based on 4 tests conducted.
For the thalamus, the voxel-wise between groups analysis was masked with a bilateral thalamus mask composed of the left and right thalamus from the Harvard-Oxford atlas. To further investigate activation patterns across different thalamic regions, we used the Morel atlas to define 3 thalamic regions covering the mediodorsal nucleus (MD; 236 voxels), the pulvinar (PUL; 543 voxels) and the ventrolateral nucleus (VL; 361 voxels). These 4 thalamus ROIs are presented in Supplementary Figure 1. To correct for multiple thalamic regions, we report Bonferroni corrected p-values based on 3 tests conducted.
To ensure that these effects were not driven by differences in performance, a secondary set of analyses including only high performing subjects was also conducted (see Supplementary Table 3).
Beta-series Connectivity.
Task connectivity was conducted using the beta-series correlation analysis method. Beta-series connectivity refers to a method of examining task connectivity by isolating a brain region’s response to an event in a task (e.g. cue presentation) and then characterizing the covariance between task response in other brain regions, separately for each condition of interest. Beta-series differs from the more conventional psychophysiological interactions (PPI) method for investigating task connectivity in that power is derived from the number of trials/events presented, rather than based on time course correlations. In designs with many trials (>30) and short events, beta-series provides superior power to detect connectivity than PPI. We constructed a GLM model including a regressor per trial to compute a separate parameter estimate (beta value) for each trial, resulting in 120 covariates of interest entered into the GLM (60 Single and 60 Dual trials). The GLM also included covariates of no interest to model the effects of shifting signal levels across runs and 6 motion parameters. This GLM resulted in a unique set of 120 beta values for each voxel in the brain. Beta values from correct trials were sorted into Single and Dual ‘beta series’ for each voxel in the brain. The task-based thalamus region from the between groups comparison of the Dual>Single contrast was used as a seed. Connectivity between this thalamus seed and each PFC ROI was calculated for the Dual and Single conditions by correlating their respective beta series. Additional analyses examining beta series connectivity from the MD, PUL and VL to the left LPFC are included in Supplementary Figure 2.