Title.
Whole brain polarity regime dynamics are significantly disrupted in schizophrenia and correlate strongly with network connectivity measures.
Abstract.
From a large clinical blood oxygenation level dependent (BOLD) functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) study, we report several interrelated findings involving transient supra-network brainwide states characterized by a saturation phenomenon we are referring to as “polarization.” These are whole-brain states in which the voxelwise-normalized BOLD (vn-BOLD) activation of a large proportion of voxels is simultaneously either very high or very low. The presence of such states during a resting-state fMRI (rs-fMRI) scan is significantly anti-correlated with diagnosed schizophrenia, significantly anti-correlated with connectivity between subcortical networks and auditory, visual and sensorimotor networks and also significantly anti-correlated with contemporaneous occupancy of transient functional network connectivity states featuring broad disconnectivity or strong inhibitory connections between the default mode and other networks. Conversely, the presence of highly polarized vn-BOLD states is significantly correlated with connectivity strength between auditory, visual and sensorimotor networks and with contemporaneous occupancy of transient whole-brain patterns of strongly modularized network connectivity and diffuse hyperconnectivity. Despite their consistency with well-documented effects of schizophrenia on static and time-varying functional network connectivity, the observed relationships between polarization and network connectivity are with very few exceptions unmediated by schizophrenia diagnosis. Many differences observed between patients and controls are echoed within the patient population itself in the effect patterns of positive symptomology (e.g. hallucinations, delusions, grandiosity). Our findings highlight a particular whole-brain spatiotemporal BOLD activation phenomenon that differs markedly between healthy subjects and schizophrenia patients, one that also strongly informs time-resolved network connectivity patterns that are associated with this serious clinical disorder.
Introduction.
While there is growing attention in human blood-oxygenation dependent (BOLD) functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) studies focused on time-varying connectivity between functional networks and even on time-varying spatial structure of the network maps, much less attention is given to the global spatial dynamics of activated brain space induced by and facilitating time-varying network relationships. These ambient whole-brain spatiotemporal phenomena can exhibit strong relationships with disease and provide a wider-angle lens through which to view the results of network-level analyses. We present here one example of a dynamically varying spatial phenomenon that correlates very strongly with schizophrenia diagnosis, exhibits structured and robust effects on observed functional network connectivity (FNC), correlates significantly with occupancy of certain dynamic functional network connectivity (dFNC) state and also exposes very different patterns of spatiotemporal dynamics and organization in schizophrenia patients (SZs) and healthy controls (HCs). The basis of this analysis is an early-stage transformation of the pre-processed BOLD fMRI volume into voxelwise normalized form (vn-BOLD /vn-fMRI). Although every voxel spends exactly a third of its time in the upper (resp. lower, resp. middle) third of its own intrinsic activation profile, the proportion of gray-matter voxels simultaneously in the upper (resp. lower) third of their respective activation profiles during given TRs is highly variable. In healthy subjects we find the brain coalesces regularly into states where a high proportion of voxels are simultaneously in the highest (resp. lowest) third of their activation profiles, i.e. states in which the brain is highly polarized.
These highly polarized brain states occur significantly more often in healthy controls than in schizophrenia patients (see Fig 1). The more balanced state characterized by an approximately equal proportion of voxels in the highest, lowest and middle thirds of their intrinsic activation profiles (IAPs) occurs much more frequently in schizophrenia patients. These polarized regimes are also very strongly correlated with short-timescale whole-brain functional network connectivity states (some positive, some negative correlations in which the effect direction differs between patients and controls for the highly modularized connectivity state exhibiting negative DMN-to-other connections). The phenomenon of widespread polarization can be parsed more finely in spatial terms, and doing so also reveals distinctions between patients and controls. Examples include the determination of each voxel’s “polarity participation rate” which is its probability of being in the top (resp. bottom) third of its own activation profile at times when this condition holds for a large proportion of voxels, i.e. when the whole brain is in a polarized state. We find that the spatial distribution of voxelwise polarity participation differs significantly between patients and controls; in controls there are large clearly delineated regions characterized by very high polarity participation rates, while in patients the larger and better defined regions are those that represent very low rates of polarity participation. Another way to probe the time-varying spatial structure of polarized voxels is to recode (polarity code) voxel timeseries as {−1,0,1} according to whether the voxel is in the bottom, middle or top third of its intrinsic activation profile at each TR. The polarity-coded brain maps can then be clustered into a set of brainwide voxel co-polarization patterns, providing a spatially explicit parameterization of polarity space in which subject trajectories can be studied. We find highly significant differences between patients and controls in occupancy rates of the resulting clusters.
Materials and methods.
Participants, preprocessing, network identification and dynamic functional connectivity.
We summarize below some basic information about data collection, preprocessing, network identification and computation of dynamic functional connectivity. Details are available in. Resting state functional magnetic resonance imaging data was collected from 163 healthy controls (117 males, 46 females; mean age 36.9) and 151 age and gender matched patients with schizophrenia (114 males, 37 females; mean age 37.8) during eyes-closed conditions at 7 different sites across United States. Data for six of the seven sites was collected on a 3T Siemens Tim Trio System. One site used a 3T General Electric Discovery MR750 scanner. All resting state fMRI scans were acquired using a standard gradient-echo echo planar imaging paradigm: FOV of 220 × 220 mm (64 × 64 matrix), TR = 2 s, TE = 30 ms, FA = 770, 162 volumes, 32 sequential ascending axial slices of 4 mm thickness and 1 mm skip. Data processing was performed using a combination of toolboxes (AFNI1, SPM2, GIFT3) and custom code written in Matlab. We performed rigid body motion correction using the INRIAlign toolbox in SPM to correct for subject head motion followed by slice-timing correction to account for timing differences in slice acquisition. To mitigate the impact of outliers, the data was despiked using AFNI's 3dDespike algorithm. Individual subject scans were then warped to a Montreal Neurological Institute (MNI) template and resampled to 3 mm3 isotropic voxels. Instead of gaussian smoothing, we smoothed the data to 6 mm full width at half maximum (FWHM) using AFNI's BlurToFWHM algorithm which performs smoothing by a conservative finite difference approximation to the diffusion equation, an approach that has been shown to reduce scanner specific variability in smoothness providing “smoothness equivalence” to data across sites. Each voxel time course was variance normalized prior to performing group independent component analysis as this has shown to better decompose subcortical sources in addition to cortical networks. Following the early stage processing, the data from all subjects was decomposed using group independent component analysis (GICA) into 100 network spatial maps (http://icatb.sourceforge.net) of which 47 were identified as functionally meaningful resting state networks (RSNs). Subject specific spatial maps (SMs) and timecourses (TCs) were obtained from the group level spatial maps via spatiotemporal regression. The timecourses were detrended, orthogonalized with respect to estimated subject motion parameters, then despiked and band-pass filtered into [0.05,0.15] Hz using a 5th order Butterworth filter. Dynamic functional connectivity (dFNC) between RSN timecourses was estimated using a sliding window approach. Following protocols from recent studies on dynamic connectivity, we used a tapered rectangular window length of 22 TRs (44 seconds), shifted 1TR forward at a time and computed pairwise correlations between RSN time courses within these windows. Static, or traditional functional network connectivity (FNC) simply uses a single untapered window of length 162TR, the length of the scan. The 47 functionally meaningful networks retained from the 100 component GICA all into 5 broad functional domains: subcortical (SC, 5 networks), auditory (AUD, 2 networks); visual (VIS, 11 networks), sensorimotor (SM, 6 networks), cognitive control (CC, 13 networks), default mode network (DMN, 7 networks), cerebellar (CB, 2 networks).
Pre-processing of 4D volumes for the polarity analysis was identical to that for dFNC, except for the inclusion of a voxelwise detrending step and the omission of the spatial smoothing step that typically precedes GICA. This choice was made to control for cases in which a relatively small number of evenly distributed extremely high (or low) intensity voxels distort polarity measurements for the regions they are distributed within.
Dynamic polarity states, polarity metric and polarity participation maps.
We construct several measures intended to capture spatial patterns in the brain formed by the set of voxels that are either simultaneously very highly activated or simultaneously minimally activated. These co-polarized voxels do not exclude voxel collections that share correlative relationships, but they are far more general. Included in the set of voxels, for example, that are highly activated during a given TR there would usually be a subset that rose together from an earlier TR, a subset that dropped together from an even higher previous level of activation and a subset that are roughly unchanged from the previous TR. Which is to say that within the set of highly activated voxels at a given TR can be, in a temporally localized sense, subsets consisting of correlated voxels, anti-correlated voxels and uncorrelated voxels.
Voxel activation profiles and polarity coding.
The timeseries of each gray matter voxel  is individually z-scored to create a normalized (intrinsic) activation profile. Values in each z-scored timeseries are then discretized into discrete intrinsic activation level (IALs), i.e. they are recoded as −1s, 0s or +1s according to whether they are in the lower third (z<−0.43, ‘Low Polar’), middle third (z∈(−0.43,0.43), ‘Neutral’) or upper third (z>0.43, ‘High Polar’) of the voxel’s intrinsic activation profile (see Fig 2). The resulting discretized timeseries in  for each voxel will be referred to as the its discretized intrinsic activation level timeseries, IALv(t).
Dynamic polarity regimes (dPRs).
Every individual voxel intrinsic activation level timeseries assumes, by design, each of the values −1, 0 and 1 exactly 1/3 of the time. This however provides no information about the proportion of voxels simultaneously at the same IAL at any given TR. Switching from the individual voxel standpoint to the whole brain standpoint, we characterize each TR by a length-3 vector , h(t),l(t),n(t)∈[0,1], h(t)+l(t)+n(t) = 1 of proportions where  are the proportion of voxels at each intrinsic activation level at TR = t. If we do not keep track of the entire history of each voxel, the number of voxels in any of the three intrinsic activation levels observed at a given TR would follow a binomial distribution with p = 1/3, . The expected number for any of the levels would be  and the expected proportion in each level would simply be . Empirically we see μ(h) = 0.333,μ(l) = 0.335,μ(n) = 0.332. Applying k-means clustering (Matlab’s built-in k-means function with 3 clusters, 3000 iterates, 300 replicates, Euclidean distance, number of clusters selected by the elbow criterion) to all 50240 of these 3-vectors (one for each of 314 subjects at 160 TRs) suggest the brain dynamically organizes into three very stylized polarity regimes (dPRs) (see Fig 3): a High-Polarized regime whose cluster centroid (0.46,0.24,0.30) presents h≫1/3, l≪1/3 and n~1/3; a Low-Polarized regime whose cluster centroid (0.23,0.46,0.31)presents h≪1/3, l≫1/3 and n~1/3; and a Non-Polarized or Equidistributed Regime whose cluster centroid (0.33,0.33,0.34) presents h~1/3, l~1/3 and n~1/3 (see Fig 4).
Polarity metric.
We also define a real-valued polarity metric. Since  and the polarized states are characterized by having both h>1/3 and l<1/3, a given subject’s degree of polarization at TR = t can be summarized with Π(t) = −(h_z (t)l_z (t)), where hz and lz are z-scored versions of the timeseries h(t) and l(t) respectively, recentered to have mean 0. Large positive values of hz (resp. lz) represent values of h(t) (resp. l(t)) that are much larger than 1/3, while high magnitude negative values of hz (resp. lz) represent values of h(t) (resp. l(t)) that are much smaller than 1/3. The most polarized timepoints are those in which one of hz or lz is large and positive, while the other is large and negative. So Π(t) is rising with the degree of polarization at TR = t, is near zero when the brain is balanced between h(t),l(t) and n(t) and grows more negative when both h(t) and l(t) are simultaneously much larger or much smaller than 1/3 (brain is not polarized but also not well balanced between h(t),l(t) and n(t)) (see Fig 5).
Polarity participation maps (PPMs).
The dPRs are crude summaries and capture nothing about the locations or identities of voxels that contribute to the computed proportion of voxels in each of the three levels at a given TR, and thus nothing about the overall role of specific voxels in producing the a subject’s polarized regimes. To capture this information we create a polarity participation map (PPM) for each subject in which each voxel is assigned a value in [0,1] according to the proportion of polarized dPR states it contributes to, i.e. the sum of the proportion of that subject’s Polarized-High states during which that voxel’s IALv(t) = 1 and the proportion of their Polarized-Low states during which the voxel’s IALv = −1 (see Fig 4). Applying k-means clustering (Matlab’s built-in k-means function with 2 clusters, 3000 iterates, 300 replicates, Euclidean distance, number of clusters selected by the elbow criterion) to all 314 of these 60303-vectors (one for each of 314 subjects) yields clusters whose centroids evidently represent different spatial distributions of highly participating voxel (Fig 6, bottom left).
Network-level polarity participation.
To assess the role that different functional networks play in whole-brain polarized states, we threshhold and binarize the 47 group-level network spatial maps and then average the value of each subject’s z-scored polarity participation map restricted to the threshold-surviving voxels in each network spatial map (see Fig 7, bottom row). Specifically, each group spatial map is z-scored (since scale in GICA spatial maps is arbitrary) and thresholded at z≥1.25 to retain the only the top decile of voxels. The polarity participation rates are also z-scored and averaged, for each subject, over each network’s threshold-surviving voxels. The measured network participation for a given subject and a given network can thus be negative, indicating that the average voxel in that network participates in the subject’s whole-brain polarized states at a sub-mean level.
Dynamic brainwide co-polarization patterns (CoPPs).
The low-dimensional dPRs give a rough sense of how overall counts of co-polarized voxels vary through time and PPMs provide a time-averaged picture of which regions of the brain are most commonly implicated in whole-brain polarized states. Neither approach, however, provides insight into how highly polarized whole-brain states evolve and dissolve, nor what role they may play in longer whole-brain itineraries that involve more structured or intricate spatial patterns of polarity-coded voxels. Toward this end we extract transient whole-brain patterns of co-polarization in a voxel-intrisic analogy to whole-brain co-activation patterns (CAPs) employed in several published studies. Replacing each continuous voxel timeseries v(t) with its discretized intrinsic activation level timeseries IALv(t) yields a representation of the entire brain in  at each TR. Applying k-means clustering (Matlab built-in k-means function with 13 clusters, 3000 iterates, 100 replicates, Euclidean distance, number of clusters selected by the elbow criterion) to all 50240 of these  = 6030-dimensional observations (one for each of 314 subjects at 160 TRs) spatially elaborates the crude numerical counts/proportions captured by the 3-dimensional dynamic dPRs. The brainwide co-polarization patterns (CoPPs) that emerge as centroids of these clusters indicate that the cruder dPRs are capturing spatially structured voxel-level arrangements whose population-level occupancy rates are relatively uniform (, top left). Among the CoPPs associated with TRs that are assigned to one of the polarized dPR states are some that are pervasively polarized, i.e., the proportion of voxels simultaneously at either High or Low levels is much higher than the ~45% or so in the associated dPR cluster centroid (see Fig 8, bottom left).
Identification of the most ‘strongly polarized’ CoPPs.
Although the samples being clustered are 60303-dimensional vectors of −1’s 0’s and +1’s, the elements of the cluster centroids are averages in the continuous interval [−1,1]. Due to the high dimensionality of the samples (i.e., membership in a given cluster can arise predominantly from good matching of some arbitrary collection of tens of thousands of voxels to other cluster members, while still leaving thousands of degrees of freedom), the determination of what it means for one of these centroids to represent a “pervasively polarized” brain state is necessarily somewhat subjective. We have decided on a criterion based loosely on the asymptotic distributions of sample means for a set of identically distributed uniform discrete random variables under a convenient (but not entirely valid assumption) of independence. The sample is quite large so the asymptotic framing is not entirely unreasonable. We will say that a CoPP represents a strongly polarized state if the probability that the magnitude of the absolute mean |μCoPP| of its elements would have probability less than α = 0.001 under a very conservative adaptation of above-stated model. The sign of μCoPP in such a case determines if that CoPP is positively or negatively polarized. Since voxels assume values +1,0 ans -1 with equal probability, i.e. , we assume by the central limit theorem that the within-cluster voxel means are distributed as  where ci is the number of observations in the cluster, and thus the global mean μi of the whole set of v = 60303  random variables is distributed as . The rescaling factor vci>107 for all i, which makes the standard deviation so close to 0 that absolute values as small as 10−5 are in the extreme α = 0.001 tails of the distribution. To account for the high level of spatiotemporal dependence and produce a distribution whose far tails do not include values with magnitude smaller than 10−5, we first reduce ci by treating all timepoints from a given subject as dependent, so that cluster i is treated as containing ni = 314ri samples, where ri is the population-averaged occupancy rate of cluster i. We further assume, based on the group spatial ICA (GICA) performed on this data that there are 47 independent units of space (the set of “good” spatially independent networks identified by the GICA). The test distribution for μi thus becomes , a distribution with much more conservative tails than . Using the α = 0.001 tails of this distribution as a threshold we identify 3 positively (see Fig 9) and 3 negatively polarized CoPPs.
Longer itineraries in polarity space.
We take two approaches to investigating forward-time CoPP itineraries:
Itineraries from group-averaged transition probabilities.
We find the forward-time group-level most-probable itinerary from a source CoPP Ci through a set of subsequent distinct CoPPs Cj,Ck,Cl,… where i≠j≠k≠l≠⋯ by using transition probabilities computed at the group level: from Ci the most probable forward-time transition out of Ci at the group-averaged level is to Cj, and from Cj the most probable transition is to Ck etc. This process which can be extended until one of the elements of the path repeats, at which point the remainder of the forward-time itinerary is determined by the segment that contains the initial instance and the successor instance of the repeated element. Note that these are itineraries with respect to CoPP transitions from one state to a new distinct state, not accounting for the probability of remaining in the presently occupied CoPP. For purposes of interpretation it is important to keep in mind both that the reported itineraries are computed from group-level average transition probabilities and that they are expressed in terms of successive distinct states rather than successive timepoints. We are employing this approach to better understand how healthy and patient populations move through the polarity space (parameterized in terms of CoPPs) and specifically to probe the role the most pervasively polarized states may be playing in overall brain function.
Sparse convolutional coding of CoPP occupancy timeseries.
Another way to study longer sequences of CoPP occupancies is to perform multichannel 1-dimensional convolutional sparse coding (CSC) of the symbolic timeseries of CoPP occupancies. These are symbolic timeseries because although we are indexing the CoPPs with a set of nonnegative integers, the actual index values have no numerical meaning: they can be permuted, replaced with large negative numbers, replaced with letters or words or any other way of identifying a given CoPP with some tag or label. This is a slightly unconventional type of timeseries to approach with convolutional feature extraction techniques, however it can be handles by treating the 1D symbolic timeseries in a N-letter alphabet as an N-channel binary 1D timeseries, which is effectively a multivariate timeseries in which exactly one of the channels (or univariate consitutent timeseries) takes value 1 at every timestep, while all others are 0 at that timestep. This encodes the occupancies in channel form and allows the use of convolutional sparse coding algorithms, such as those developed for the the publicly available Python-based sparse coding package Sporco. Based on initial exploratory work, resource/efficiency considerations and concern with ease of interpretation we used Sporco’s convolutional basis pursuit denoising (CBPDN) dictionary learning algorithm to represent the CoPP symbolic timeseries data with a dictionary of 64 mutichannel (in this case 13 channels, one for each CoPP) elements of temporal duration 7TRs. The elements represent replicable translation-invariant features of the mutichannel timeseries data that combine additively at each timepoint to reproduce the local properties of the signal. The elements of the dictionary are also, as an entire set, optimized so that only a small number of the elements are making the largest proportion of nonzero contributions to signal reconstruction, e.g. they are translation-invariant features, built from a nonlinear feature extraction algorithm, that ultimately reproduce the data additively with the largest rate of nontrivial contribution coming from a subset of the features.
Statistical analyses.
All reported schizoprenia or symptom effects from regression analyses were obtained from mutiple regressions in which age gender and mean frame displacement (motion) were included as nuisance variables, i.e. the reported effects are already corrected for age, gender and motion. In the case of symptom effect, the reported results for a specific category of symptom, e.g. positive symptoms of schizophrenia, are also corrected for confounding effects of the remaining symptom categories, e.g. negative and general symtoms.