Title.
Interhemispheric connectivity and hemispheric specialization in schizophrenia patients and their unaffected siblings.
Abstract.
Hemispheric integration and specialization are two prominent organizational principles for macroscopic brain function. Impairments of interhemispheric cooperation have been reported in schizophrenia patients, but whether such abnormalities should be attributed to effects of illness or familial risk remains inconclusive. Moreover, it is unclear how abnormalities in interhemispheric connectivity impact hemispheric specialization. To address these questions, we performed magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) in a large cohort of 253 participants, including 84 schizophrenia patients, 106 of their unaffected siblings and 63 healthy controls. Interhemispheric connectivity and hemispheric specialization were calculated from resting-state functional connectivity, and compared across groups. Results showed that schizophrenia patients exhibit lower interhemispheric connectivity as compared to controls and siblings. In addition, patients showed higher levels of hemispheric specialization as compared to siblings. Level of interhemispheric connectivity and hemispheric specialization correlated with duration of illness in patients. No significant alterations were identified in siblings relative to controls on both measurements. Furthermore, alterations in interhemispheric connectivity correlated with changes in hemispheric specialization in patients relative to controls and siblings. Taken together, these results suggest that lower interhemispheric connectivity and associated abnormalities in hemispheric specialization are features of established illness, rather than an expression of preexistent familial risk for schizophrenia.
Highlights.
Schizophrenia patients show lower interhemispheric connectivity (IC) compared to siblings and controls.
Lower IC is associated with higher hemispheric specialization (HS) in patients.
Siblings do not show changes on IC and HS relative to controls.
Connectivity metrics (IC, HS) correlate with duration of illness in patients.
Introduction.
Two prominent features of macroscopic brain organization are hemispheric integration, characterized as a high level of collaboration between bilateral brain regions, and hemispheric specialization, referring to the association of behavioral traits with a particular side of brain. Proper integration and segregation of the two cerebral hemispheres are crucial for a broad repertoire of cognitive functions including language, visuospatial attention, and manual preference. Conversely, disturbances of hemispheric coordination may impact cognitive and behavioral functioning and contribute to neuropsychiatric disorders including schizophrenia.
Multiple lines of evidence suggest that schizophrenia may involve abnormalities in interhemispheric connectivity and cooperation, which may contribute to central features of the illness such as auditory verbal hallucinations and cognitive deficits. Behavioral studies indicate that a bilateral processing advantage that is normally present during language tasks is compromised in schizophrenia patients and studies using event-related potentials (ERP) show evidence of impaired information transfer between the hemispheres during cognitive tasks in schizophrenia. Moreover, structural neuroimaging studies report that schizophrenia patients have decreased volume and fiber integrity of the corpus callosum, the major fiber bundle connecting the two hemispheres, and fMRI studies show impaired levels of functional synchronization between homotopic brain regions (i.e., corresponding areas in the left and right hemisphere) at rest.
However, important open questions regarding interhemispheric connectivity in schizophrenia remain. First, it is unclear whether interhemispheric connectivity deficits are primarily related to the effects of the illness or a reflection of (genetic) risk for the disorder. Unaffected first-degree relatives of schizophrenia patients are a valuable population to study this question as they share the genetic predisposition and environmental factors for the illness, but are not clinically affected. Previous studies have reported abnormalities in unaffected relatives in large-scale brain regional interactions during tasks and rest, and a limited number of studies have shown subtle abnormalities in functional, and structural connectivity between homotopic brain regions in patients and relatives. In the current study, we examine homotopic interhemispheric functional connectivity in a large cohort of schizophrenia patients and their nonpsychotic siblings to assess how interhemispheric connectivity alterations relate to risk for schizophrenia.
Another open question is what the consequence of reduced interhemispheric connectivity may be for hemispheric specialization characterized by intrinsic connectivity. Traditionally, hemispheric specialization studies have focused on functional or anatomical asymmetry of homotopic brain regions. More recently, studies have extended the concept of hemispheric specialization to include connectivity asymmetry, by investigating functional interaction patterns of brain regions in the two hemispheres. One such measurement is the hemispheric autonomy index, which calculates the difference in connectivity strength of a brain region with ipsilateral areas versus contralateral areas during rest. Studies have shown that regions with high autonomy values (i.e. preferably connecting to ipsilateral areas) in the left hemisphere overlap with regions showing asymmetrical activation during language tasks, and that regional autonomy index values correlate with verbal and visuospatial behavioral scores in healthy subjects. We hypothesize that impaired interhemispheric connectivity may cause the two hemispheres to function more autonomously, favoring within over between-hemisphere interregional cooperation. To test this hypothesis, we examine how interhemispheric connectivity deficits in schizophrenia patients and their unaffected siblings relate to hemispheric specialization as quantified by the hemispheric autonomy index.
Material and methods.
Participants.
A total of 253 participants, including 84 schizophrenia patients, 106 of their unaffected siblings and 63 healthy controls, were recruited at the University Medical Center Utrecht between September 2004 and April 2008, as part of the Genetic Risk and Outcome of Psychosis (GROUP) study. The GROUP study was conducted by four university psychiatric centers and their affiliated mental health care institutions in the Netherlands. The medical ethics committee of the University Medical Center Utrecht approved the current study. All subjects provided written informed consent prior to participation.
For all participants, presence or absence of current and lifetime psychopathology was established using the Comprehensive Assessment of Symptoms and History (CASH). This semi-structured interview is designed to obtain comprehensive information on current and past signs and symptoms of major psychiatric disorders, premorbid functioning, sociodemographic status, treatment, and course of illness. Patients were included if they met Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders fourth edition (DSM-IV) criteria for schizophrenia or schizoaffective disorder. Symptom severity was assessed using the Positive and Negative Syndrome Scale (PANSS). The dosage of antipsychotic medication patients were taking at the time of scanning were converted to a chlorpromazine equivalent dosage.
Patients and siblings originated from 120 unique families and included 48 patient-sibling pairs or triplets. The control group comprised 63 subjects from 57 families. A family identification code (family ID) was assigned to every subject to keep track of their pedigrees. Siblings and healthy controls were excluded for any current or previous psychotic disorder. In addition, controls were examined with the Family Interview for Genetic Studies, to exclude a family history of psychotic disorders (in first- or second-degree relatives). Exclusion criteria for all participants included a history of head trauma or major medical or neurological illness. All participants were between 18 and 60 years of age at the time of inclusion. Demographics and clinical information are described in Table 1.
Data acquisition.
MRI scans were acquired on two 1.5 T Philips Achieva scanners at the University Medical Center Utrecht, with the same acquisition protocol. The scanner information was included as a covariate in further group-comparisons. For each subject, resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) time series were acquired with a three dimensional (3D) echo shifting with a train of observations (PRESTO) acquisition scheme. The PRESTO protocol combines the echo shifting technique with multiple gradient echoes per excitation to allow for a repetition time shorter than echo time. The acquisition parameters were: TR / TE = 21.1 / 31.1 ms; flip angle = 90°; field of view = 256 × 256 mm2, voxel size = 4 × 4 × 4 mm3, 900 time frames, consisting of 32 slices covering whole brain. In addition, a T1-weighted scan was collected as anatomical reference with the following scanning parameters: TR/TE = 30/4.6 ms; flip angle = 30°; field of view = 256 × 256 mm2, voxel size = 1 × 1 × 1.2 mm3.
Data preprocessing.
Resting-state fMRI data were preprocessed using the Data Processing and Analysis for Brain Imaging (DPABI) toolbox on MATLAB v. R2016a (Mathworks). For every subject, the first 10 functional volumes were removed to allow for signal stabilization. The rest of the functional images were realigned, co-registered with their individual anatomic image, and corrected for nuisance variables (six rigid realignment parameters, signal drift, averaged signal from white matter and cerebrospinal fluid) using a linear regression model. Band-pass filtering (0.01–0.1 Hz) was applied to fMRI time-series to reduce effects of low-frequency drifts and high-frequency noise. Subsequently, the functional scans were spatially normalized to MNI space using a symmetric group-specific T1 template, and resampled to 3 × 3 × 3 mm3 voxels. Spatial smoothing was applied to normalized images with a 4 mm full-width half-maximum (FWHM) Gaussian kernel. In view of recent findings on the influence of in-scanner head motion on fMRI signals, images with excessive movement (frame-wise displacement >0.5 mm) and 1 backward and 2 forward scans relative to the marked frame, were scrubbed. The scrubbing procedure negated group-differences in head motion (before scrubbing χ(2)2 = 6.20, p = .04 and after scrubbing χ(2)2 = 4.09, p = .13, Supplementary Table 1), and did not lead to differences on the number of images rejected among the three subject groups (χ(2)2 = 3.54, p = .17).
The Harvard-Oxford atlas was applied to whole-brain functional data in order to parcellate the brain into 112 bilateral regions (48 cortical and 8 subcortical regions per hemisphere). Region names, abbreviations, anatomic classification (frontal, temporal, parietal, occipital lobe, cingulate cortex and subcortical regions) and functional hierarchy (primary sensorimotor regions, unimodal, heteromodal association areas, (para)limbic and subcortical regions) are referenced in Supplementary Table 2. The functional hierarchy subdivision scheme is based on previous studies. Regional time-series were averaged across voxels, and cross-correlated for each pair of brain regions using Pearson's correlation. Correlation coefficients were converted to z scores using Fisher's z transformation, serving as a measure of functional connectivity strength between two regions.
Interhemispheric connectivity.
The level of functional connectivity between 56 regions in one hemisphere and their corresponding areas in the other hemisphere is used here as the measure of interhemispheric connectivity. Interhemispheric connections between homotopic regions are among the strongest functional associations in cortical-cortical interactions and have reliably been identified in both healthy and clinical populations. As a supplementary analysis, group-differences in heterotopic interhemispheric connectivity and left and right intrahemispheric connectivity were examined in the same manner as homotopic interhemispheric connectivity. Moreover, to assess the consistency of interhemispheric connectivity measurements between studies, we performed an additional analysis examining the correlation in regional interhemispheric connectivity in controls between this study and the study of.
Hemispheric specialization.
Hemispheric specialization is calculated here as the difference in connectivity strength between intrahemispheric and heterotopic interhemispheric connections of each brain region. Homotopic interhemispheric connections were not used in the calculation of hemispheric specialization so that we could examine relationship between hemispheric specialization and interhemispheric connectivity in the following analysis. A positive value of hemispheric specialization indicates that a region or hemisphere is preferentially connected to other regions within its own hemisphere, whereas a negative value suggests that a region or hemisphere is more strongly connected to regions in the contralateral hemisphere. The method used to compute hemispheric specialization using intrinsic functional connectivity has been described in previous studies using a voxel-based analysis.
Statistical analysis.
Effects of group and covariates on interhemispheric connectivity and hemispheric specialization were assessed using linear-mixed effect models. For interhemispheric connectivity, fixed-effects include: group status (controls, siblings, patients), age, sex, handedness (right / left / mixed), scanner (#1 / #2) and head motion. To control for potential group-differences in global connectivity, mean connectivity strength of all non-homotopic connections (i.e., all intrahemispheric and heterotopic interhemispheric connections) was included as a fixed-effect term (global FC). Family ID, encoding the subjects' pedigree information, was included as random-effect term to control for family ties between subjects (Eq. (1)). The model has 237 observations (number of subjects with complete information), and 10 fixed term predictors (constant, group_sibling, group_patient, age, gender_female, handedness_left, handedness_mixed, scanner_#2, motion, global FC), leaving = 237–10 = 227 residual degrees of freedom.
Equation 1:
For hemispheric specialization, group status, age, sex, handedness, scanner and head motion were again included as fixed-effect terms. Additionally, we included hemisphere as a fixed factor to examine potential differences in connectivity patterns between the two hemispheres. Random effect terms include family ID and subject ID nested within family ID. The number of fixed term predictors is 10 (constant, group_sibling, group_patient, age, gender_female, handedness_left, handedness_mixed, scanner_#2, motion, hemisphere_RH), and residual degrees of freedom is 237 × 2 (hemisphere) – 10 = 464.
Equation 2:
Linear-mixed effects analysis was first applied to overall interhemispheric connectivity and hemispheric specialization (p < .05), and then to each of 56 regional measurements, controlling for multiple comparisons (p < .05, Bonferroni corrected). Overall and regional measurements with significant group effects were subjected to post-hoc bivariate comparisons between each pair of subject groups (p < .05).
Relationship between interhemispheric connectivity and hemispheric specialization.
To test whether schizophrenia-related changes in interhemispheric connectivity co-vary with alterations in hemispheric specialization, we calculated the mean difference between controls and patients on both measurements for each brain region. Pearson's correlation analysis was performed on group-differences of interhemispheric connectivity and hemispheric specialization across regions (p < .05). The same analysis was performed for siblings as compared to patients, and for controls compared to siblings.
Correlation between connectivity alteration and clinical factors.
To examine the potential clinical relevance of connectivity changes in patients, the level of interhemispheric connectivity and hemispheric specialization were correlated with illness duration and PANSS total scores in patients (p < .05). Moreover, antipsychotic medication was examined as a potential confounder of functional connectivity measurements by correlating daily medication in chlorpromazine equivalent dose with interhemispheric connectivity and hemispheric specialization.