Title.
Load-Dependent Hyperdeactivation of the Default Mode Network in People With Schizophrenia.
Abstract.
Schizophrenia is associated with impairment in a range of cognitive functions. Neuroimaging studies have reported lower, but also higher, task-induced activation accompanying impaired performance. Differences in task-load and the ability of people with schizophrenia (PSZ) to stay engaged in the cognitive operations probed appear to underlie such discrepancies. Similarly, task-induced deactivation of the default mode network (DMN) was weaker in PSZ relative to healthy control subjects (HCS) in most studies, but some reported greater deactivation. An inability to stay engaged in the cognitive operations could account for these discrepancies, too, as it would lead to more time off-task and consequently less deactivation of DMN functions. The present study employed a change detection paradigm with small to moderate set sizes (SSs) of 1, 2, and 4 items. Task training prior to fMRI scanning abolished the group difference in no-response trials. Task-positive regions of interest (ROIs) displayed greater activation with increasing SS in both groups. PSZ showed greater activation relative to HCS at SSs 1 and 2. DMN ROIs displayed greater deactivation with increasing SS in PSZ, but not in HCS, and PSZ tended to hyperdeactivate DMN regions at SS 4. No hypodeactivation was observed in PSZ. In conclusion, when minimizing differences in task-engagement, PSZ tend to over-recruit task-positive regions during low-load operations, and hyperdeactivate DMN functions at higher load, perhaps reflecting heightened non-specific vigilance or effort when dealing with cognitive challenges. This speaks against an inability to down-regulate task-independent thought processes as a primary mechanism underlying cognitive impairment in schizophrenia.
Introduction.
Schizophrenia is associated with impairment in a range of cognitive functions. Accompanying activation differences in task-specific brain areas have been studied extensively. Recently, the focus has widened to include task-related deactivations. A relatively consistent set of brain regions has been shown to deactivate during various external processing tasks relative to rest. These areas, termed the default mode network (DMN) of resting brain function, are thought to subserve stimulus-independent thought processes such as mind-wandering when the individual is not engaged in external stimulus processing. Down-regulation of DMN activity appears to be necessary for successful cognitive performance (e.g.).
Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI) studies of cognition reported less pronounced task-induced DMN deactivation in people with schizophrenia (PSZ) than in healthy control subjects (HCS). Such findings led to suggestions that an inability to down-regulate task-independent thought processes may contribute to cognitive impairment in PSZ. There are, however, discrepant reports of DMN hyperdeactivation in PSZ, with support also from a study employing constrained principle component analysis. These three studies have in common that performance of PSZ displayed no clear impairment relative to HCS, whereas PSZ performed significantly worse in most studies reporting hypodeactivation. employed extensive task practice prior to scanning, which eliminated the group difference in the number of no-response trials and appeared to equate the time spent “off-task”. This suggests that difficulty managing the cognitive operations and maintaining task engagement may have contributed to findings of DMN hypodeactivation in other studies.
These considerations are reminiscent of the neuroimaging literature on working memory (WM). While early studies overwhelmingly supported lower prefrontal cortex (PFC) activation in PSZ, several subsequent studies reported equal or even greater activation. This may reflect the inverted-U relationship between WM load and PFC activation. Greater load increases activation, but when it exceeds an individual’s capacity, activation decreases. Thus, when imposing task demands manageable for HCS but exceeding the capacity of PSZ, PFC activation would be lower in PSZ. Indeed, across studies, larger performance deficits of PSZ tend to be associated with greater hypofrontality. In contrast, greater activation can be observed in PSZ at lower WM loads, which are manageable but more challenging to PSZ than to HCS.
The present fMRI study compared WM load-dependent activation of typical task-positive regions, and deactivation of the DMN, between PSZ and HCS. Load was varied as the number of items maintained in a Change Detection Task (CDT). Reduced WM capacity in PSZ has been shown in similar paradigms; however, by keeping the set size (SS) modest and providing extensive practice prior to scanning, we aimed at evoking at most minimally impaired performance and comparable task engagement in PSZ and HCS. We hypothesized that, under these conditions, both activation of task-positive and deactivation of DMN regions would be equal or greater in PSZ relative to HCS, but not reduced.
Materials and Methods.
Participants.
Twenty-two medicated (detail in Supplement) outpatients meeting DSM-IV criteria for schizophrenia (N=21) or schizoaffective disorder (N=1), and 20 HCS, all right-handed, completed this study. Data from four HCS and one PSZ were excluded because they appeared to be asleep during parts of the scan. Demographic information of the remaining participants is summarized in Table 1. Groups did not differ in age, sex, ethnicity, or parental education. PSZ tended to have fewer years of education (P<0.1) and scored lower on neuropsychological tests of cognition. Because blood pressure can affect BOLD responses to neuronal activation, we compared groups on systolic (P>0.6) and diastolic blood pressure (P>0.3).
Participants provided informed consent for a protocol approved by the Institutional Review Boards of the University of Maryland, Baltimore, and the National Institute on Drug Abuse – Intramural Research Program.
Procedure.
During an initial training session, participants received task instructions, performed the full-length tasks on a PC, and completed neuropsychological testing. Training performance data from one PSZ was lost due to recording errors. Scans were always performed on a separate day to avoid exhaustion. Participants performed two tasks while undergoing fMRI: first a stimulus detection task, reported elsewhere, then the CDT described below. An anatomical scan was obtained between tasks. The CDT was preceded by four blocks of a visuomotor control task, not reported here.
The CDT.
The design was first described by. Participants viewed a 200-ms encoding array of 1, 2, or 4 colored squares, circles, or triangles (each participant was allocated one shape) against a black background (Figure 1A). After a 1100-ms blank-screen delay, one of the shape stimuli reappeared for 2000 ms. The task was to make an index finger response if the shape that had been presented at this location changed color, and a middle finger response if the color stayed the same (50% probability). Trials were separated by a 1000-ms intertrial interval. The larger a participant’s WM capacity, the more items are encoded, and the greater the probability of a correct response. While ceiling effects are likely at SS 1 and 2, SS 4 somewhat exceeds the capacity of most participants and thus is sensitive to group differences in WM capacity. Dependent variables were accuracy, reflecting the percentage of correct choices (chance being 50%), average reaction time over all responses, and no-response trials, reflecting the percentage of trials in which participants failed to respond.
The task was presented in 26-s blocks of 6 trials each (3 change, 3 no-change). All trials within a block were of the same SS (block design analysis). Eight scan runs (each 178 s, or 89 TRs) were separated by rest periods during which the scanner was turned off. Each run contained one block of each SS, one 26-s rest block during which participants fixated a central cross, and two blocks in which either one relevant and one irrelevant, or two relevant and two irrelevant shapes were presented. These two conditions tapped specific hypotheses about mechanisms of selective attention in PSZ and were modeled but not further analyzed for the purposes of this study.
Magnetic resonance imaging.
A 3 Tesla Siemens Tim Trio scanner (Erlangen, Germany) acquired whole-brain EPI images for measuring T2*-weighted BOLD effects [4-mm oblique (30º) axial slices, 64×64 matrix, FOV=22×22 cm, TR=2 s, TE=27 ms]. An axial T1-weighted image (MPRAGE) provided anatomical reference (1-mm3 voxels, TR=1.9 s, TE=3.51 ms, FA=9º).
Data were processed using AFNI. Each volume was registered to a base volume. For each subject, a composite motion index was calculated from the six motion correction parameters (Yang et al., 2005). These scores did not differ between HCS and PSZ [t(32)=1.66, P>0.1]. TRs with >0.5 mm displacement or >0.5° rotation relative to the preceding TR were censored out of the time series. The number of censored TRs did not differ between groups [t(35)=0.60, P>0.5]. The time series was analyzed by voxel-wise multiple regression. Five 26-s boxcar regressors, corresponding to blocks with 1, 2, and 4 item trials, and to the two blocks involving distractors (see 2.3), were convolved with a model hemodynamic response function. The six motion parameter curves were included as regressors of no interest. All correlations between any of three regressors of interest and any of the motion regressors were near zero (all Ps >0.9), and the groups did not differ in average stimulus-correlated motion [t(35)=0.50, P>0.6]. For each subject, the voxel-wise average amplitude of signal change produced by each of the three SSs relative to rest blocks was determined. These maps were re-sampled to a 1-μL resolution, converted to a standard coordinate system, and spatially blurred.
Second-level analyses:.
For visualization of SS-dependent activity within PSZ and within HCS, a Gaussian 5-mm root mean square (RMS) isotropic kernel was adopted. Whole-brain voxel-wise multiple linear regression was performed within each separate group, with SS as the regressor of interest. Voxel-wise P<0.001 combined with a 438-μL clustersize threshold yielded overall P<0.05 based on Monte Carlo simulations.
For direct statistical groups comparisons based on pre-defined regions of interest (ROIs), a 10-mm RMS kernel was applied to minimize the impact of morphological differences between PSZ and HCS (e.g.,) and reduce the risk of group differences in regional activation resulting from comparing non-corresponding anatomical areas. ROIs were defined by an independent study, to avoid bias through “double dipping”. Seven-mm-diameter spheres were centered on peak foci of the task-positive (16 ROIs) and DMN (13 ROIs) networks identified by; page 9676) based on spontaneous correlations and anticorrelations at rest. Thus, ROI definition was not biased by specific task demands. Activity was averaged within each ROI. Task-positive and DMN ROIs were analyzed by two separate three-factor ANOVAs (group × SS × ROI).