Title.
Alcoholism gender differences in brain responsivity to emotional stimuli.
Abstract.
Men and women may use alcohol to regulate emotions differently, with corresponding differences in neural responses. We explored how the viewing of different types of emotionally salient stimuli impacted brain activity observed through functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) from 42 long-term abstinent alcoholic (25 women) and 46 nonalcoholic (24 women) participants. Analyses revealed blunted brain responsivity in alcoholic compared to nonalcoholic groups, as well as gender differences in those activation patterns. Brain activation in alcoholic men (ALCM) was significantly lower than in nonalcoholic men (NCM) in regions including rostral middle and superior frontal cortex, precentral gyrus, and inferior parietal cortex, whereas activation was higher in alcoholic women (ALCW) than in nonalcoholic women (NCW) in superior frontal and supramarginal cortical regions. The reduced brain reactivity of ALCM, and increases for ALCW, highlighted divergent brain regions and gender effects, suggesting possible differences in the underlying basis for development of alcohol use disorders.
eLife digest.
More than 100 million people worldwide are thought to have alcohol use disorder, also known as AUD, alcohol dependence or alcoholism. People who struggle to regulate their emotions tend to consume more alcohol than others. This suggests that impaired emotion processing may increase the risk of developing the disorder.
Most studies of emotion processing in people with alcohol use disorder do not distinguish between men and women. But evidence suggests that men and women process emotions in different ways. Sawyer et al. set out to explore the possible relationships between emotion processing, gender and alcoholism. Four groups of volunteers took part in the study: abstinent men and women with the disorder, and control groups of men and women without a history of alcoholism. Each group contained between 15 and 21 participants. The two abstinent alcoholic groups had not consumed alcohol for at least 21 days. The average length of abstinence was 7 years.
The volunteers viewed a mixture of emotionally charged and neutral images while lying inside a brain scanner. The emotionally charged images were of happy, erotic, gruesome or aversive scenes. Sawyer et al. measured the difference in brain responses to the emotionally charged images versus the neutral ones, and compared this measure across the four groups of participants. Abstinent alcoholic men showed muted brain responses to the emotionally charged images compared to their female counterparts. This effect was seen in brain regions involved in memory, emotion processing and social processing. The same pattern occurred for all four types of emotionally charged image.
Abstinent alcoholic men also showed smaller brain responses to the emotionally charged images than non-alcoholic control men. By contrast, abstinent alcoholic women showed larger brain responses to the emotionally charged images than non-alcoholic control women. This suggests that abstinent alcoholic men and women differ in the way they process emotions. Future studies should investigate whether these differences emerge over the course of abstinence. They should also examine whether these differences might contribute to, or result from, differences in alcohol use disorder between men and women.
Introduction.
Impaired affect regulation is a primary motive for the use of drugs, including alcohol. Affective processing deficits have been linked to misinterpretation of environmental cues, irregularity in mood, and increased alcohol consumption and may be an underlying factor leading to the development and maintenance of alcohol use disorders (AUD). However, problem drinkers are a heterogeneous population. While alcohol and other GABAergic agents such as benzodiazepines typically are considered to be depressants because of their ability to decrease anxiety, tension, and inhibition, they also can function as a stimulant, generating feelings of euphoria and well-being. These effects can be experienced both by men and by women, but the appeal of alcohol for each gender subgroup of problem drinkers may be driven for contrasting reasons. For example, on average, women might drink to decrease negative affect, and men might drink to enhance favorable emotional states.
Research unrelated to AUD has indicated that men and women process emotions differently, and there are differences between men and women in personality disorders and social impairments. Women also have been found to display different psychophysiological reactions to emotional stimuli and to be more emotionally expressive than men. Conversely, men on average have an increased tendency to repress emotional responses. Additionally, alcoholic women (ALCW) are two to three times more likely to be diagnosed with anxiety and affective disorders than alcoholic men (ALCM), while ALCM are twice as likely as ALCW to have antisocial personality disorders. The presence of gender-specific deficits in emotional regulation may provide insight into what differentially motivates men and women to abuse alcohol.
Emotional processing is associated with activity within well-characterized network-based brain circuitries including prefrontal cortex, insula, cingulate cortex, and medial temporal lobe structures including the amygdala. In functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) studies measuring AUD-related abnormal brain responses during emotional processing, abstinent ALC individuals showed reduced fMRI activation in the amygdala, hippocampus, anterior cingulate, and medial frontal regions in response to viewing stimuli with a negative affective valence, compared to nonalcoholic control (NC) participants; in response to viewing stimuli with a positive affective valence, the ALC individuals showed an increase in activation in the anterior cingulate cortex, prefrontal cortex, ventral striatum, and thalamus. However, little is known about gender-specific persistent influences of alcoholism-related brain activation in response to affective materials, because little research has compared abstinent alcoholic men (ALCM) and women (ALCW) compared to nonalcoholic men (NCM) and women (NCW) (e.g.,). Therefore, using fMRI in conjunction with measures of affective judgments, an important aim of the present exploratory study was to address the need for more research in this domain by examining gender differences in the processing of high-arousal emotional stimuli on brain and behavioral responses in ALC men and women compared to NC men and women. The study was designed within a conceptual model of emotional processing adapted from.
According to this model, when an emotionally salient stimulus is perceived, Emotional Event Integration and Evaluation takes place, and a response occurs in widespread and focal dynamic corticolimbic neural networks (Figure 1—figure supplement 1). These circuitries embody different functional systems that amalgamate cognitive with feeling aspects of emotions: (1) Attention and orientation to a salient stimulus occurs in insular, anterior cingulate, prefrontal, and posterior parietal cortices. (2) Emotional event appraisal, integration, and evaluation (as influenced by the ongoing emotional context and the perceiver’s personality), takes place in posterior cingulate, orbital and medial prefrontal cortex, and other neocortical sites (e.g., fusiform gyrus and superior temporal sulcus), and limbic structures (e.g., hippocampus and amygdala). (3) Volition and decisions, which determine response choice, are generated in cingulate, precentral, premotor, and supplementary cortices.
Using the above model as a guide, we analyzed brain activation and behavioral responses within a psychological task structure aimed to assess the subjective appraisal of valence of specific emotional categories. We chose to do this in order to disentangle how brain activity during the process of evaluation and interpretation of emotional content distinguished ALC from NC groups. To engage the Emotional Integration and Evaluation System, we asked participants to view complex, emotionally meaningful pictures (aversive, erotic, gruesome, happy – and neutral for comparison), and to rate how the pictures made them feel (good, bad, or neutral). We chose stimuli representing the contrasting valences, because findings from previous research indicated that one or more of those emotional categories were sensitive to deficits in emotional processing by abstinent ALC groups compared to NC groups. It should be noted that the behavioral task is not, explicitly, either an emotion judgment task nor an emotion regulation measure. Instead, we expected the data to reflect neural responsivity as indirect measures of emotion processing and/or emotion regulation to a variety of emotionally salient stimuli.
We were especially interested in responses to happy and aversive stimuli, because (a) they have been shown to be sensitive to gender effects in brain activation levels in abstinent ALC participants who viewed faces with different emotional expressions, and (b) abnormalities in the evaluation of aversive stimuli (which are associated with negative feelings such as fear, pain, and stress), play a crucial role in the transition to AUD or alcohol relapse. Whereas brain activation alterations in emotional processes have been studied in relation to AUD, gender differences have not been explored in depth, and there is a need for more research in this domain. Therefore, in accordance with the primary aim of the present exploratory study, we sought to determine how gender differences are manifested in the brain networks outlined by our conceptual model (Event Integration and Evaluation). We hypothesized that AUD-related abnormalities in emotional evaluation (i.e., ratings and reaction times) would differ by gender, and these processes would be reflected by gender differences in brain activity during emotional evaluation. Overall, we expected that the same brain regions as in the well-characterized system involved in emotion processing, as described above, would be involved in emotional processes; however, they would not be impacted in the same way for men and women. We hypothesized that ALCM would show dampened corticolimbic activation to stimuli from most of the emotional valence categories, thereby reflecting muted affect. For women, we postulated that the pattern of abnormalities associated with AUD would differ from that of men, by showing increased activation to emotional stimuli, indicative of hyper-sensitivity to affective input.
Materials and methods.
Participants.
Prior to conducting the experiment, we computed estimates of sample size based upon Cohen’s d, which suggested approximately 20 participants per group were required to detect a medium to large effect size, a number confirmed by fMRI-specific research. A total of 88 participants (25 ALCW, 17 ALCM, 24 NCW, and 22 NCM) were included in the analyses. The characteristics of the participants, including alcoholism indices and neuropsychological test scores are presented in Figure 2 (and Appendix 1—tables 1 and 2) of the Results section; data and code are available from Dryad (https://doi.org/10.5061/dryad.5fn0224) and GitLab (https://gitlab.com/kslays/sawyer-iaps; copy archived at https://github.com/elifesciences-publications/sawyer-iaps). All participants were right-handed English speakers recruited from the Boston, MA (USA) area through flyers placed in facilities and in public places (e.g., churches, stores), and advertisements placed with local newspapers and websites. Selection procedures included an initial structured telephone interview to determine age, level of education, health history, and history of alcohol and drug use.
Specifically, we investigated the stable and persistent sequelae of AUD that are independent of current drinking or withdrawal, by recruiting long-term abstinent participants with a history of heavy drinking. Eligible individuals were invited to the laboratory for further screening and evaluations ranging between five to eight hours over the course of one to three days. Prior to screening, written informed consent was obtained; the protocols and consent forms were approved by the Institutional Review Boards of the participating institutions: Boston University School of Medicine (#H24686), VA Boston Healthcare System (#1017 and #1018), and Massachusetts General Hospital (#2000P001891). Participants were reimbursed $15 per hour for assessments, $25 per hour for scans, and $5 for travel expenses.
Participants underwent medical history interview and vision testing, plus a series of questionnaires (e.g., handedness, alcohol and drug use, HRSD) to ensure they met inclusion criteria. Participants were given the computerized Diagnostic Interview Schedule, which provides lifetime psychiatric diagnoses according to criteria established by the American Psychiatric Association. Participants were excluded from further participation if any source (e.g., hospital records, referrals, or personal interviews) indicated that they had one of the following: Corrected visual acuity worse than 20/50 in both eyes; Korsakoff’s syndrome; cirrhosis, major head injury with loss of consciousness greater than 15 min unrelated to AUD; stroke; epilepsy or seizures unrelated to AUD; schizophrenia; HRSD score over 15; electroconvulsive therapy; history of illicit drug use more than once per week within the past five years (except for one ALCW who had used marijuana more frequently but not during the six months preceding testing, and one ALCW who had used marijuana once per week for four years, ceasing four years before testing); lifetime history of illicit drug use more than once per week for over 10 years or three times per week for over five years.
Participants received a structured interview regarding their drinking patterns, including length of abstinence and duration of heavy drinking, that is more than 21 drinks per week (one drink: 355 ml beer, 148 ml wine, or 44 ml hard liquor). For each participant, we calculated a Quantity Frequency Index, which factors the amount, type, and frequency of alcohol usage (ounces of ethanol per day, roughly corresponding to number of drinks per day) over the last six months (for the NC group), or over the six months preceding cessation of drinking (for the ALC group). The ALC participants met criteria for alcohol abuse or dependence, and had over 21 drinks per week for at least five years in their lifetime; all had abstained from alcohol for at least 21 days. Importantly, to ensure stability in the sequelae of AUD, we investigated long-term abstinent participants with a history of heavy drinking and whose participation was independent of current drinking or withdrawal. None of the NC participants drank heavily (21 or more per week), except for one man who drank while serving in the army decades before the scan, but did not meet the criteria for alcohol dependence; social drinking patterns of the NC participants are reported in Figure 2 and Appendix 1—table 1. We examined the group x gender interaction within a regression model for the demographics, alcoholism indices, neuropsychological and clinical assessment scores. We also conducted Welch’s t-tests to examine gender differences for each measure for the ALC and NC groups separately, and group differences for the men and women separately.
MRI acquisition.
Imaging data were acquired using a 3T Siemens (Erlangen, Germany) Trio Tim magnetic resonance scanner. Following automated shimming and scout image acquisition, two eight-minute 3D T1-weighted MP-RAGE sequences were obtained: TR = 2530 msec, TE = 3.45 msec, flip angle = 70, FOV = 256 mm, 128 sagittal slices with in-plane resolution 1 × 1 mm, slice thickness = 1.33 mm. These two structural volumes were used for functional slice prescription, spatial normalization, and cortical surface reconstruction. Due to time constraints, only one MP-RAGE sequence was obtained for 23 subjects (11 NCM, 8 ALCM, 2 NCW, 2 ALCW). Functional whole-brain blood oxygen level-dependent (BOLD) images were obtained with a gradient echo T2*-weighted sequence: TR = 2 s, TE = 30 msec, flip angle = 900, FOV = 200 mm, slice thickness = 3.0 mm, spacing = 1.0 mm, 32 interleaved axial-oblique slices aligned to the anterior-commissure/posterior-commissure line (voxel size: 3.1 × 3.1 × 4.0 mm). The scans covered the entire cerebrum and the superior portion of the cerebellum.
Behavioral task.
Participants were presented with blocks of pictures chosen to evoke emotional responses (Figure 1). The picture stimuli were from the International Affective Picture System. Participants completed five runs (except one NCW who completed only four runs), each including five conditions: aversive, erotic, gruesome, happy, and neutral pictures. As depicted in Figure 1, each run contained three 24 s blocks of fixation plus eight 24 s blocks that each consisted of six pictures of one of the emotional conditions (e.g., happy pictures), for a total of 11 blocks per run. The five runs included a total of 40 blocks of emotional pictures with eight blocks for each of the five emotional picture conditions. Stimuli were presented only once, totaling 48 pictures per 264 s run (240 pictures in 22 min in total across the five runs).
Within stimulus blocks, the six pictures were each serially presented against a black background for 3 s, followed by 1 s of fixation (+++). Participants were instructed to answer the question: ‘How does the picture make you feel?’ Following each image within a block, participants indicated feeling good, bad, or neutral, by using their index fingers to press buttons on a box. The left index finger indicated good, the right index finger indicated bad, and both center buttons indicated neutral; the left and right were counterbalanced across participants. Block order was counterbalanced across runs, and run order was counterbalanced across participants. The task was presented with the Presentation software package (Neurobehavioral Systems, Albany, CA, USA).
Behavioral response data were analyzed using R software mixed models, with one model specified for reaction times, and one model specified for the percentage of pictures endorsed for each rating (good, bad, neutral). For both reaction times and percentage models, independent intercepts were modeled for each participant, and full-factorial ANOVAs were calculated for the four factors of rating (good, bad, neutral), condition (aversive, erotic, gruesome, happy, neutral), group (ALC, NC), and gender (men, women).
Full-factorial mixed models were employed to examine the relationships of percentage ratings and evaluation times to selected neuropsychological measures (Wechsler Verbal and Performance IQ scores, and the Delayed Memory Index), affective measures (the POMS Depression scale, and the Multiple Affect Adjective Check List [MAACL] Anxiety and Sensation Seeking scales), and brain activity (i.e., contrast effect size) within the clusters identified to have significant group x gender interactions for aversive vs. neutral and erotic vs. neutral contrasts (the two most salient contrasts). Separate mixed models were used for each measure (three neuropsychological measures, three affect measures, and five clusters, for percentage rating and evaluation times, resulting in a total of 22 models). Outliers (outside three standard deviations from the mean) were removed prior to analyses; this resulted in the exclusion of 1 ALCW and 1 ALCM for POMS Depression, and 2 ALCW and 1 NCW for MAACL Anxiety. Models were examined for significant (p<0.05) interactions of the measures with group or gender, and followed by planned comparisons: ALC vs. NC for group interactions, and subgroup differences (ALCW vs. NCW, ALCM vs. NCM) for group x gender interactions. Post-hoc comparisons examined the slope of each measure with percentage ratings or evaluation times, and Bonferroni correction was applied for the number of contrasts examined within the model.
MRI analyses.
The imaging data were analyzed using FreeSurfer and FS-FAST v6.0 (http://surfer.nmr.mgh.harvard.edu) analysis packages. Individual cortical surfaces were reconstructed using automatic gray and white matter segmentation, tessellation, and inflation. Images were registered with a canonical brain surface (fsaverage) based on sulcal and gyral patterns, and registered with a canonical brain volume (MNI305) using a 12 degrees of freedom nonlinear transform. Gray and white matter surface accuracy was individually examined using automatically-generated quality control figures (https://github.com/poldracklab/niworkflows), and no errors were detected for any of the subjects included in the analyses that would be likely to influence the outcomes of this project.
The fMRI data were corrected for motion and slice-time acquisition using FS-FAST preprocessing. Normalized motion and signal intensity spikes were obtained from the nipype rapidart algorithm (https://www.nitrc.org/projects/rapidart/, https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.596855), and blocks with motion over 1.5 mm, or signal intensity shifts over 3.0 standard deviations, were removed via a paradigm file covariate for each run. Subjects were removed from the study if this process excluded all but two or fewer blocks of any condition, a requirement that resulted in the exclusion of two additional NCW. Next, the FS-FAST process split the analysis into three spaces (left and right surfaces, and subcortical volume), then data from each subject was spatially normalized (co-registered with) the fsaverage and MNI305 spaces, respectively; all subsequent analyses were performed in these three group spaces. Spatial smoothing was performed with a 5 mm full width at half maximum Gaussian kernel in 3D for the volume and in 2D for the surfaces. Condition-specific effects were estimated by fitting the amplitudes of boxcar functions convolved with the FSL canonical hemodynamic response function to the BOLD signal across all runs.
Statistical maps were constructed from each contrast of stimulus conditions for each subject (first level analyses). Four contrasts were examined: aversive vs. neutral, happy vs. neutral, erotic vs. neutral, and gruesome vs. neutral. These first-level analyses were concatenated, and second-level (group level or between-subjects) analyses were performed using random-effects models to account for inter-subject variance, with weighted least squares effects incorporated from the variability measures from the first-level contrasts. We examined the overall main effect of group (ALC vs. NC), the interaction of group x gender, and the effects of group for men and women separately, for each of the four contrasts (each emotion condition vs. neutral condition). Cluster-level corrections for multiple comparisons were applied to cortical surface statistical contrast maps using 10,000 precomputed Z Monte Carlo simulations and applied to subcortical volumetric statistical contrast maps using gaussian random fields with a cluster forming threshold of p<0.05 and a cluster-wise threshold of p<0.05 (further corrected to p<0.017 for the analysis of three spaces: left cortex, right cortex, and subcortical). While these procedures have been shown to have a false positive (Type one error) level higher than the one specified, the present exploratory study was designed to reveal the sizes of the effects, and balance minimizing the chance of a false negative (Type two error) with the goal of highlighting the broad regions where further investigation of gender differences may be warranted. Therefore, the p-value threshold was set to a value sufficiently liberal to achieve this goal. For comparisons with research using stricter p-values, we additionally conducted the same analyses using a cluster-forming threshold of p<0.001, the results of which are discussed in the Limitations. Cortical surface cluster regions were identified by the location of each cluster’s peak vertex on the cortical surface, and subcortical cluster regions were identified by the MNI coordinates of each cluster’s peak voxel.