Title.
Examining resting-state functional connectivity in first-episode schizophrenia with 7T fMRI and MEG.
Abstract.
Schizophrenia is often characterized by dysconnections in the brain, which can be estimated via functional connectivity analyses. Commonly measured using resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) in order to characterize the intrinsic or baseline function of the brain, fMRI functional connectivity has significantly contributed to the understanding of schizophrenia. However, these measures may not capture the full extent of functional connectivity abnormalities in schizophrenia as fMRI is temporally limited by the hemodynamic response. In order to extend fMRI functional connectivity findings, the complementary modality of magnetoencephalography (MEG) can be utilized to capture electrophysiological functional connectivity abnormalities in schizophrenia that are not obtainable with fMRI. Therefore, we implemented a multimodal functional connectivity analysis using resting-state 7 Tesla fMRI and MEG data in a sample of first-episode patients with schizophrenia (n = 19) and healthy controls (n = 24). fMRI and MEG data were decomposed into components reflecting resting state networks using a group spatial independent component analysis. Functional connectivity between resting-state networks was computed and group differences were observed. In fMRI, patients demonstrated hyperconnectivity between subcortical and auditory networks, as well as hypoconnectivity between interhemispheric homotopic sensorimotor network components. In MEG, patients demonstrated hypoconnectivity between sensorimotor and task positive networks in the delta frequency band. Results not only support the dysconnectivity hypothesis of schizophrenia, but also suggest the importance of jointly examining multimodal neuroimaging data as critical disorder-related information may not be detectable in a single modality alone.
Highlights.
Altered subcortical-auditory fMRI functional connectivity at rest in first-episode.
fMRI sensorimotor interhemispheric homotopic connectivity altered in first-episode.
Sensorimotor-task positive connectivity alterations in delta frequency band.
Introduction.
Schizophrenia is frequently described as a heterogeneous disorder of brain connectivity as it is characterized by altered functional and structural cortical network integration. These aberrant interactions between brain regions may be induced by abnormal physiological and neuronal processes. Resting-state functional connectivity measures are often implemented to examine these altered connections between functional networks. In the absence of a task being performed, resting-state functional connectivity measures the temporal coherence between spatially separate regions of the brain. It is believed that examination of the functional interactions between brain networks in schizophrenia can be used to better characterize the disorder as well as further elucidate the underlying mechanisms of the disorder.
Numerous functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) studies examining functional connectivity in schizophrenia have been reported. These studies have indicated that connectivity is altered in schizophrenia and may be manifested via the disorder's clinical symptoms. Although reported fMRI functional connectivity abnormalities generally implicate alterations involving the task positive network, as well as the default mode network (DMN), connectivity abnormalities are heterogeneous across studies. Therefore, as Houck and colleagues have pointed out, although fMRI provides excellent spatial resolution, sole reliance on fMRI to explore dysconnectivity is limited by the slow temporal resolution of the hemodynamic response. While fMRI measures hemodynamic changes, magnetoencephalography (MEG) enables the examination of the faster neural oscillations believed to underlie the blood oxygenation level dependent (BOLD) response of fMRI. However, just as fMRI has limited temporal resolution, the spatial resolution of MEG is limited due to the inferences necessary for signal localization and projection onto the brain. Hence, as the complementary modalities of fMRI and MEG respectively provide high spatial and temporal resolution, they can be used together to extend dysconnectivity findings in schizophrenia.
Theoretical and experimental evidence implicate post-synaptic currents as a common origin of both the fMRI and MEG signals, suggesting that while these signals have different properties, they share a common underlying electrophysiological process. In addition, while low frequency oscillations are thought to support interactions between distant brain regions, high frequency oscillations are thought to be restricted to localized networks. Congruent with this notion, in non-human primates, a coupling between low-frequency oscillations (<20 Hz) and BOLD connectivity in a thalamo-cortical network was demonstrated during a resting state. Furthermore, several studies have compared the spatial maps of functional connectivity obtained with BOLD and MEG and found a degree of spatial similarity between them. Interestingly, the best spatial match between fMRI and MEG occurs with neural oscillations in the beta frequency.
Recent multimodal functional connectivity studies have been implemented using complementary fMRI and MEG. Only three studies have evaluated MEG resting state functional connectivity in schizophrenia, and all three combined MEG with fMRI. One study was limited to the evaluation of fronto-hippocampal functional connectivity. Another study evaluated whole brain functional connectivity and reported a pattern of both hypo- and hyperconnectivity in frontal-DMN networks and within the frontal networks with MEG, and hypoconnectivity in temporal-occipital and frontal-occipital networks and within the occipital networks with fMRI in patients compared to controls. Using the same cohorts of chronic patients with schizophrenia and controls, the third study demonstrated improved classification of patients using combined fMRI/MEG methods, proving the importance of examining both the hemodynamic and electrophysiological functional connectivity effects when characterizing schizophrenia.
In addition to characterizing schizophrenia using both hemodynamic and electrophysiological functional connectivity measures, it is important to examine the different stages of the disorder (e.g., premorbid, prodromal, onset/deterioration, residual) to further understand and characterize the pathophysiological mechanisms of schizophrenia. While examining all stages of the disorder are important, examination of first-episode patients with schizophrenia is especially important as studies have demonstrated that the early stages of the disorder are critical in determining the overall course and outcome of the disorder. Moreover, studying first-episode patients allows for the examination of intrinsic abnormalities of the disorder rather than the confounding effects (e.g., medication, disorder chronicity on brain structure/function) introduced when investigating later stages of the illness.
The purpose of this study is to examine resting-state functional connectivity in a sample of healthy controls and first-episode patients with schizophrenia using both 7 Tesla (7 T) fMRI and MEG. Using independent component analyses to extract resting-state networks from both fMRI and MEG, we hypothesize that patients will exhibit connectivity alterations in comparison to controls in both resting state fMRI and MEG mapping to task positive and default mode networks. Because low frequency oscillations are thought to support interactions between distant regions, we further hypothesize that functional connectivity alterations will be more similar between fMRI and MEG in the low frequency bands. Likewise, we also hypothesize that connectivity alterations examined in MEG will vary with different frequency bands. The consistent finding that patients tend to exhibit aberrant spontaneous brain activity in the theta and delta EEG/MEG frequency bands, also suggests that MEG functional connectivity differences between patients and controls will be strongest at these low frequencies.
Materials and methods.
Participants.
Minimally treated first-episode patients with schizophrenia were recruited from the University of Alabama at Birmingham (UAB) emergency room, inpatient units, and various outpatient clinics. Informed consent to participate in this UAB Institutional Review Board (IRB) approved study was obtained following evaluation of competency to provide informed consent. Additionally, healthy controls matched on age, gender, parental socioeconomic status (SES), years of education, and smoking status were enrolled in the study.
Diagnoses were established with a review of medical records and evaluation by two board certified psychiatrists (ACL and NVK) and confirmed using the Diagnostic Interview for Genetic Studies. Exclusion criteria for this study included the presence of major medical or neurological conditions, history of head trauma with loss of consciousness, substance abuse within six months of imaging (excluding nicotine), pregnancy, MRI contraindications, and use of medication altering brain function. Exclusion criteria for healthy controls also included a personal history of Axis I disorders or in first-degree relatives.
A total of 23 first-episode patients with schizophrenia were enrolled in the study. Of these, fMRI resting-state data for 19 patients remained for analysis as one subject was too large, one subject was unable to complete the scan due to scanner intolerability, one subject was excluded due to poor scan quality, and one subject did not complete a resting-state fMRI scan. MEG data for 19 patients remained for analysis as one subject was too large, one subject was lost to follow-up, one subject was hospitalized long-term, and data for one subject lacked head position sensor information. A total of 24 matched healthy controls were enrolled in the study. Of the 24 controls enrolled, fMRI resting-state data for 21 subjects remained for analysis as three subjects did not complete a resting-state fMRI scan. MEG data for 24 controls remained for MEG analysis.
Symptom severity was assessed using the Brief Psychiatric Rating Scale (BPRS), the Scale for the Assessment of Negative Symptoms (SANS), and the Scale for the Assessment of Positive Symptoms (SAPS). The Repeatable Battery for the Assessment of Neuropsychological Status (RBANS) was used to assess cognitive function for healthy controls and patients.
Functional MRI analysis.
fMRI scanning parameters.
All scans were performed at the Auburn University MRI Research Center on a whole-body 7 T Siemens MAGNETOM MRI scanner (Siemens Healthineers, Erlangen, Germany), with a 32-channel head coil. High-resolution structural scans were acquired using a 3-dimensional T1-weighted magnetization-prepared rapid acquisition gradient-echo sequence (MPRAGE; 256 slices, repetition time/echo time/inversion time [TR/TE/TI] = 2000/2.89/1050 ms, 7° flip angle, 190 mm field of view, 0.7 mm isotropic voxels, base resolution = 256, sagittal acquisition, GRAPPA acceleration factor = 2). Resting-state fMRI scans were acquired using a gradient recalled echo-planar imaging sequence (TR/TE = 3000/28 ms, 70° flip angle, 200 mm field of view, 37 slices, 0.85 mm × 0.85 mm × 1.8 mm voxels, iPAT GRAPPA acceleration factor = 3, base resolution = 234, interleaved acquisition, A > P phase encode direction, 1 ms echo spacing, gap = 1.08 mm). Six-minute resting-state scans consisted of 120 volumes. Field maps were acquired using a gradient-recalled echo (GRE) sequence (TR/TE1/TE2 = 400/4.92/7.38 ms, 60° flip angle, 200 mm field of view, 36 slices, 3.1 mm × 3.1 mm × 3.0 mm voxels, base resolution = 64, interleaved acquisition, gap = 0.75 mm).
fMRI preprocessing.
Data preprocessing of resting-state scans was performed with SPM12 (Wellcome Trust Centre for Neuroimaging, London, UK; http://www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm/) and the “CONN” Connectivity Toolbox using standard preprocessing steps. More specifically, preprocessing steps included realignment and unwarping using phase maps, slice timing correction, coregistration to anatomical space using the T1-weighted MPRAGE structural image and using the first functional image as reference, normalization to Montreal Neurological Institute (MNI) space using the first functional volume as reference, artifact detection, and Gaussian smoothing [5 mm full-width half-maximum (FWHM)]. Resulting preprocessed functional resting-state data maintained a spatial resolution of 0.855 mm × 0.855 mm × 2.88 mm.
fMRI group independent component analysis.
The Group ICA of fMRI Toolbox (GIFT; http://mialab.mrn.org/software/gift) was used to perform group-level spatial independent component analysis (ICA). A subject-specific data reduction principal component analysis (PCA) first reduced the data to 75 principal components followed by a group data reduction retaining 50 principal components. In order to carry out PCA in a memory efficient-manner, PCA was carried out using the expectation maximization algorithm. The infomax algorithm was then utilized for group-level spatial ICA to generate 50 spatially independent components (ICs) (See Supplementary Fig. 1 for estimation of the number of ICs using minimum description length criteria). In order to measure component stability/quality, the infomax ICA algorithm was repeated 20 times in ICASSO and the most representative run was used in subsequent steps. Subject-specific spatial maps and time courses were estimated using GICA back-reconstruction.
fMRI component identification.
In accordance with previous studies, ICs were classified as resting-state networks (RSNs), rather than artifacts, based on spectral properties and functional relevance. The power spectra for each component were characterized by dynamic range and the ratio of low frequency to high frequency power. Dynamic range can be defined as the difference between maximum power and minimum power at frequencies to the right of the power spectra peak. The ratio of low frequency to high frequency power can be defined as the ratio of integral spectral power below 0.1 Hz to integral spectral power between 0.15 and 0.167 Hz. Components were also evaluated for functional relevance via visual inspection. Components were inspected and classified as non-artifactual or RSNs based on the following criteria: (1) peak activations should occur primarily in grey matter and correspond anatomically to known functional brain networks, (2) low spatial overlap with vascular, ventricular, motion and susceptibility artifacts, (3) time courses predominantly characterized by low frequency fluctuations. Of the 50 components extracted, 30 were identified as RSNs (Fig. 1).
MEG analysis.
MEG scanning parameters.
Resting-state MEG recordings were collected in a shielded room below ground level using a 148-channel whole head magnetometer (MagnesTM 2500 WH, 4-D Neuroimaging) at the University of Alabama at Birmingham. Recordings were sampled at a rate of 1000 Hz, with a bandpass filter of 0.1 to 200 Hz. Fiducial head-sensor coils were used to ensure the subject's head did not move during a scan. Additional head-sensor data were collected using a 3D digitizer and later used for registration between each subject's MEG and anatomical MRI. During the 5-min resting-state scan, subjects were placed in the supine position with eyes closed. Visual inspection of the real-time display showed no MEG correlates of sleep. Subjects were also clearly responsive immediately before and after the scanning period as they all instantly opened their eyes upon instruction.
MEG preprocessing.
MEG data were analyzed using Brainstorm. Preprocessing of the raw data included removal of line noise data using a notch filter (60, 120, 180, 240, 300 Hz) and high-pass filtering at 0.3 Hz. Cardiac and motion artifact was removed from the signal using an independent component analysis where the signal was decomposed into 20 independent components using JADE (joint approximate diagonalization of eigenmatrices). Additional artifacts were removed using a signal-space projection method.
Resting-state MEG data was then registered to individual subject high resolution structural MRI scans. Prior to MEG-MRI registration, cortical surfaces and subcortical structures from each structural MRI were extracted using the FreeSurfer image analysis suite (http://surfer.nmr.mgh.harvard.edu/) and subsequently inspected using FreeSurfer's QA Tools. Data identified as unsatisfactory during quality assurance were manually corrected and reprocessed. A pseudo-individual anatomy for each subject missing structural MRI scans (n = 5) was created by warping the default ICBM 152 template anatomy in Brainstorm to the digitized head points. A 15,000-vertex cortical surface source model was used for head modeling.
Forward volume head modeling of the magnetic field was defined using an overlapping-sphere method where voxels were placed on a 5 mm3 grid of the brain. Inverse source modeling was performed using a linearly-constrained minimum variance (LCMV) beamformer. Beamformer projection was performed using an unconstrained dipole orientation for each subject separately. Data covariance matrices generated for each subject were regularized using a median eigenvalue approach where the tail of the eigenvalues spectrum is flattened to the median value.
MEG Hilbert envelope computation.
The Hilbert transform was applied to the resting-state time courses in which the signals were first filtered into delta (1–4 Hz), theta (4–8 Hz), alpha (8–13 Hz), beta (13–30 Hz), and gamma (30–50 Hz) frequency bands using a band-pass filter followed by application of the Hilbert transform. The absolute value of the transformed signals was subsequently computed in order to provide a measure of the envelope of the signal. The Hilbert envelope values were then standardized using a 1/frequency compensation where values at each frequency bin were multiplied by the frequency value. Following spectrum normalization, the Hilbert envelope was downsampled to 1 Hz in accordance with previous studies. Therefore, scans consisted of 301 volumes for each frequency band. In order to enable comparison between subjects and groups, downsampled source envelope data for each subject were spatially interpolated from the individual subject head model to the MNI ICBM 152 default MRI template in Brainstorm and spatially smoothed (5 mm FWHM).
MEG Group independent component analysis.
Group-level spatial ICA was performed on the MEG data in the GIFT Toolbox where each frequency band – delta (1–4 Hz), theta (4–8 Hz), alpha (8–13 Hz), beta (13–30 Hz), and gamma (30–50 Hz) – was input as a different session for each individual. Similar to fMRI group ICA analysis, MEG data were first reduced to 75 principal components using a subject-specific data reduction PCA and then reduced to 50 principal components via group data reduction. PCA was carried out using the expectation maximization algorithm. The infomax algorithm was then utilized for group-level spatial ICA to generate 50 spatially independent components (ICs) (See Supplementary Fig. 1 for estimation of the number of ICs using minimum description length criteria). Component stability/quality was measured by repeating the infomax ICA algorithm 20 times in ICASSO. Subject-specific spatial maps and time courses were estimated using GICA back-reconstruction.
MEG component identification.
MEG ICs were classified as RSNs, rather than artifacts, following the same method described in the previous section: fMRI Component Identification. Of the 50 components extracted, 33 were identified as RSNs (Fig. 1).
Functional connectivity analysis.
Functional connectivity analysis.
Functional connectivity analysis for fMRI and MEG was performed using the spatial maps and corresponding time courses extracted during the ICA analysis. For the fMRI data, framewise displacement was regressed from the subject-specific RSN time courses prior to connectivity analyses. Framewise displacement was computed as the absolute frame-to-frame displacement of the brain from six realignment parameters using a radius of 50 mm to convert angle rotations to displacements. Therefore, individual displacement values for each volume of the time course (i.e., 120 frame-to-frame displacement values) resulted. Framewise displacement was regressed from the subject-specific RSN time courses prior to functional connectivity analysis. It is important to note that mean framewise displacement did not differ between groups [HC: 0.19±0.09 mm (range: 0.07–0.44 mm); SZ: 0.21±0.14 mm (range: 0.04–0.47 mm); t = −0.78, p = .44]. No participants exceeded mean framewise displacement of 0.5 mm. The number of head motion outliers (defined as FD >0.5 mm) did not differ between groups (HC: 5.67±6.51%, SZ: 6.79+/− 7.49%, t = −0.51 p = .62). Subject-specific fMRI and MEG RSN time courses were detrended and despiked using 3dDespike (http://afni.nimh.nih.gov/afni) and then filtered with a fifth-order Butterworth low-pass filter (0.15 Hz cutoff) prior to connectivity computation.
Functional connectivity was calculated as the pairwise Pearson correlation between RSN time courses, resulting in individual correlation matrices for each subject's fMRI data and MEG frequency bands. Time courses were extracted from the independent components obtained by ICA. Correlations were based on the average time course across voxels within each independent component. Individual correlation matrices were averaged across subjects in each group in order to generate group-level connectivity matrices. Within- and between-group differences in functional connectivity were evaluated on subject-level correlation matrices via paired and two-sample univariate t-tests, respectively.
In exploratory post hoc analyses, the relationship between functional connectivity and symptom scores including, BPRS, SAPS, and SANS was explored using Spearman correlations in order to examine the potential impact of symptoms on functional connectivity.