Title.
Differential neural reward mechanisms in treatment responsive and treatment resistant schizophrenia.
Abstract.
Background.
The significant proportion of schizophrenia patients refractory to treatment, primarily directed at the dopamine system, suggests that multiple mechanisms may underlie psychotic symptoms. Reinforcement learning tasks have been employed in schizophrenia to assess dopaminergic functioning and reward processing, but these have not directly compared groups of treatment-refractory and non-refractory patients.
Methods.
In the current fMRI study 21 patients with treatment resistant schizophrenia (TRS), 21 patients with non-treatment resistant schizophrenia (NTR), and 24 healthy controls (HC) performed a probabilistic reinforcement learning task, utilising emotionally valenced face stimuli which elicit a social bias toward happy faces. Behavior was characterized with a reinforcement learning model. Trial-wise reward prediction error (RPE)-related neural activation and the differential impact of emotional bias on these reward signals were compared between groups.
Results.
Patients showed impaired reinforcement learning relative to controls, while all groups demonstrated an emotional bias favouring happy faces. The pattern of RPE signaling was similar in the HC and TRS groups, whereas NTR patients showed significant attenuation of RPE-related activation in striatal, thalamic, precentral, parietal, and cerebellar regions. TRS patients, but not NTR patients, showed a positive relationship between emotional bias and RPE signal during negative feedback in bilateral thalamus and caudate.
Conclusion.
TRS can be dissociated from NTR on the basis of a different neural mechanism underlying reinforcement learning. The data support the hypothesis that a favourable response to antipsychotic treatment is contingent on dopaminergic dysfunction, characterized by aberrant RPE signaling, whereas treatment resistance may be characterized by an abnormality of a non-dopaminergic mechanism-a glutamatergic mechansim would be a possible candidate.
Introduction.
Antipsychotic medication has been used to treat the symptoms of schizophrenia since the early 1950s. The mode of action for all currently licensed antipsychotics is via their action on dopamine D2 receptors. However, approximately one third of patients with a diagnosis of schizophrenia - – fail to respond adequately to a trial of antipsychotic medication at recommended doses and duration; surprisingly, this occurs despite adequate D2 receptor occupancy. The implication is that these occurrences of “treatment resistant” schizophrenia (TRS) are either characterized by a distinct neurochemical deficit, reflecting the heterogeneous nature of schizophrenia, or that the dopaminergic dysfunction is markedly more severe in TRS, sufficient that modulating the dopaminergic system with standard dopamine blocking antipsychotics is not enough to alleviate symptoms in these complex cases.
Schizophrenia has frequently been studied within a framework of reinforcement learning given the involvement of dopamine function in reward prediction. Reinforcement learning is driven by midbrain dopamine neurons encoding violations of expected reward outcomes, known as reward prediction error (RPE) signals. Specifically, unexpected reward elicits a phasic increase in firing of dopamine neurons, whereas omission of an expected reward results in a phasic decrease in firing. Midbrain RPE signals are thought to act as a learning signal which is fed through fronto-cortical basal ganglia loops in order to adjust behaviour accordingly. Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) of brain regions which are densely innervated by dopamine neurons, particularly the striatum and aspects of the prefrontal cortex, typically show activation reflective of an RPE response, in line with the notion that the blood oxygen level dependent (BOLD) signal likely reflects the information an area is receiving and processing. A recent meta-analysis of neuroimaging studies of prediction error during reinforcement learning confirmed robust prediction error activation in both ventral and dorsal aspects of the striatum as well as cortical regions including medial prefrontal, inferior and superior frontal, inferior parietal, and occipital cortex. Consistent with pathologically increased tonic striatal dopamine in schizophrenia, phasic RPE signaling in the striatum has been shown to be reduced in schizophrenia patients, a finding attributed to “drowning” of these phasic signals due to elevated presynaptic dopamine. As the primary target of dopaminergic neurons, the ventral striatum has been a major region of interest for reinforcement learning studies in schizophrenia; however, impaired RPE signaling has also been detected in patients in additional areas such as prefrontal cortex, parietal cortex, thalamus, and cerebellum. Furthermore, there is evidence that reward feedback processing and RPE signaling in schizophrenia is selectively impaired for reward outcomes, but largely intact for loss outcomes, typically consisting of omission of expected reward. While meta-analytic findings have shown some overlap of neural regions processing reward and punishment in healthy individuals including in the striatum und medial frontal cortex, encoding of prediction errors during gain and loss outcomes appears to be spatially segregated in temporal and occipital regions. This supports the possibility that the reward processing network could be selectively impaired in schizophrenia.
The question of whether a common dopaminergic abnormality underlies both treatment responsive and treatment resistant schizophrenia remains largely unresolved. Recent evidence suggests that elevated striatal dopamine synthesis capacity is specific to treatment responsive schizophrenia, whereas anterior cingulate glutamate levels may be selectively increased in TRS. However, the neural activation associated with dopamine functioning in the context of reinforcement learning has not been explicitly compared between these patient groups. Given the link between dopamine and RPE activation, a normal RPE signature would be expected in TRS if dopamine function is indeed unimpaired in this group. In contrast, treatment responsive patients would be expected to exhibit the abnormal RPE activation typically associated with schizophrenia. Note that behavior may be similarly impaired in the two groups if distinct nodes of the same reward network are differentially impaired. Reinforcement learning relies not only on striatal dopamine function, but also on complex fronto-striatal interactions regulating related processes such as cognitive control, goal maintenance and planning, as well as action value and effort computations. As bottom-up learning signals are utilized to update a model of the surrounding environment, it is necessary to exert top-down cognitive control-particularly in the presence of persistent cognitive or behavioral bias-in order to optimise task focused learning. As such, it is possible that even with intact RPE signaling, a lack of cognitive control modulating learning processes could lead to a disruption of reinforcement learning. Notably, glutamatergic dysfunction may be associated with these cognitive control deficits in schizophrenia, providing a useful explanatory mechanisms for potential deficits in TRS.
In this study, we aimed to tap into these processes by quantifying cognitive bias in a reinforcement learning task and observing its modulation of RPE signaling. We compared treatment resistant and treatment responsive patients with a diagnosis of schizophrenia using fMRI while investigating 1) neural correlates of RPEs during wins and losses and 2) the association of cognitive bias with these learning signals. Cognitive bias was induced with a probabilistic reinforcement learning task using faces with varying expressions, which is known to elicit a bias towards happy faces in both healthy controls and patients with schizophrenia. We examined RPE signaling separately for wins and losses on this task both because dissociable systems have been suggested for prediction error signaling of rewards and losses and due to evidence that reward and loss processing may be differentially impacted in schizophrenia. In addition we anticipated that this would more closely reflect variabilities in prediction errors rather than effects of outcome itself.
Based on the theory that treatment responsive schizophrenia, but not TRS, is characterized by an abnormal dopaminergic signature, we tested the hypothesis that responsive patients would show reduced RPE signaling compared to healthy controls and TRS patients. This effect was expected to be particularly pronounced for win outcomes in areas typically associated with RPE signaling and dysfunctions in schizophrenia such as the striatum and thalamus. An additional exploratory analysis examined whether emotional bias would differentially modulate the neural RPE response in TRS patients compared with both responsive patients and controls.
Methods and materials.
Participants.
The study recruited 42 individuals with a diagnosis of schizophrenia (according to ICD-10 criteria) and 24 healthy controls matched for age, sex, and socioeconomic background consented to participate in this study. The patient sample included 21 with treatment resistant schizophrenia (TRS), based on persistent psychotic symptoms as defined as a score of at least 4 (moderate) on at least two positive symptom items of the Positive and Negative Syndrome Scale (PANSS), at least two prior drug trials of 4–6 weeks duration with no clinical improvement, and persistence of illness for longer than five years with no period of good social or occupational functioning. The latter two criteria were ascertained by reviewing patients’ medical records and self-report of occupational status. The remaining 21 patients (NTR) fulfilled criteria for being in symptomatic remission, as defined by a score of 3 or less on all items of the PANSS, these symptoms having been stable for at least 6 months and prescribed a stable dosage of antipsychotic for the previous 6 months. Current clozapine use was an exclusion criterion for all patients. Exclusion criteria for all subjects were a history of neurological illness, current major physical illness, and drug dependency over the last six months. Exclusion criteria for HC were a history of psychiatric illness and a first-degree relative having suffered from a psychotic illness. All subjects had normal hearing and normal or corrected-to-normal vision. The two patient groups were matched for age, sex, duration of illness, medication type and dosage. Intelligence quotient was measured with the two-item Wechsler Abbreviated Scale of Intelligence (WASI). Chlorpromazine (CPZ) equivalent doses of medications were calculated using conversion tables. Ethical approval was provided by the London Camberwell St Giles Research and Ethics Committee. All participants provided informed written consent and were compensated for their time and travel.
fMRI procedure.
A schematic of a trial sequence is shown in Supplementary Figure 1. Subjects underwent a reward learning paradigm consisting of choosing between two simultaneously presented faces, and over a series of iterative trials, learning to identify which of the faces was associated with a higher reward probability. Subjects were given the task of maximizing the reward (10p per correct choice) achieved during the task. The task screen was viewed via a head-mounted mirror inside the MRI scanner and response selection was via a button box operated by the right index and middle fingers.
The task consisted of four blocks of 30 trials each, during which two faces were presented side by side. One face was associated with a 60% reward probability and the other with a 40% reward probability. Faces within a block differed either in emotional expression (blocks 1 and 3) or identity (blocks 2 and 4), as described previously. In brief, emotional blocks consisted of one happy and one angry face with the same identity. Neutral blocks consistent of two faces with different identities but with neutral expressions. Combinations of identities and reward contingencies were counterbalanced across blocks and subjects.
Each trial began with a period of 1000 ms during which a white central fixation cross was presented against a dark background. This was followed by two faces being presented to the right and left of the fixation cross for 4500 ms. Within this time window subjects were required to select one of the faces by pressing the corresponding button with their right hand. The selected face was highlighted by a yellow square surrounding it. Feedback was then presented on the screen for 1500 ms. The task had a total duration of approximately 15 minutes.
Scanning parameters.
Functional scans were acquired using a T2* echo planar sequence (430 volumes, TR=2000 ms, TE=35 ms, field of view = 24 cm, slice thickness = 3 mm, matrix = 64 × 64, flip angle = 75°) sensitive to blood oxygenation level-dependent (BOLD) contrast on a 3T GE Excite II MR scanner (GE Healthcare, USA). A structural image was acquired for each subject with a T1-weighted magnetization prepared rapid acquisition gradient echo (MP RAGE) sequence (TR=7321 ms, TE=3 ms, TI = 400 ms, field of view = 240, slice thickness = 1.2 mm, 196 slices).
Reinforcement learning model.
The behavioural data was modelled using a “double update” reinforcement learning model. Choice probability for choosing option 1 on trial t was computed on each trial using the softmax function  where the inverse temperature β determines the randomness of the subject’s choice, and Q1(t) denotes the action value, or expected reward, for choice 1 on trial t. The action value for the chosen option is updated on a trial-by-trial basis using the reward prediction error, defined as the difference between the expected reward Q and obtained reward R on trial t, scaled by the learning rate parameter α.
The action value for the unchosen option 2 was additionally updated on each trial, using the inverse reward value and identical learning rate parameter:
This model reflects the symmetry of choice outcomes, whereby feedback associated with a chosen option is also informative of the unchosen option (e.g., if stimulus 1 lost, stimulus 2 would have won).
The two free parameters β and α were estimated for each group separately by minimizing the negative log likelihood of the observed data pooled across all subjects within the group.
Behavioural analysis.
Choices were defined as ideal if the action value (computed by the model) of the chosen option was greater than that of the unchosen option. Subjects’ proportions of ideal choices were analysed using a linear mixed effects model including the predictors group (HC vs. NTR vs. TRS) and condition (emotional vs. neutral)
Emotional bias was defined as the difference between the proportion of choices for the happy face when the angry face would have been an ideal choice, and proportion of choices for the angry face when the happy face would have been the ideal choice. Emotional bias was compared between groups using one-way ANOVA.
fMRI preprocessing and analysis.
The fMRI data were preprocessed and analyzed using the FEAT tool from the FMRIB Software Library (FSL, http://fsl.fmrib.ox.ac.uk/fsl/fslwiki/,). Functional and structural brain images were extracted from non-brain tissue using FSL’s brain extraction tool (BET), and EPI images were realigned using MCFLIRT to correct effects of head motion. A 100-s temporal high-pass filter was applied and data were spatially smoothed using a Gaussian kernel of 5mm FWHM.
The functional MRI data were analyzed using the general linear model as implemented in FSL FEAT. For the first level analysis, the phases of the task (face presentation, choice, win outcome, and loss outcome) were modelled separately for emotional and neutral trials, resulting in eight unmodulated regressors. In addition, the win outcome and loss outcome phases were parametrically modulated with the trial-by-trial RPE values, again separately for emotional and neutral trials, resulting in four additional parametric regressors.
Each regressor was modelled with a delta function of zero duration and convolved with a canonical hemodynamic response function and its temporal derivative. Six standard motion parameters as well as a motion artefact confound matrix, which identified motion-corrupted volumes, were added as regressors of no interest. Volumes detected as corrupted were calculated by DVARS as implemented by FSL Motion Outliers. Percentage of corrupted volumes did not differ between groups, F(2,60) = 0.166, p > .848 (HC: N = 24; M = 0.4%, SD = 0.2%; NTR: N = 21; M = 0.4%, SD = 0.2%; TRS: N = 18; M = 0.4%, SD = 0.3%).
Contrasts of interest were constructed using the RPE regressors of win and loss outcomes separately. The first two contrasts averaged across the emotional and neutral conditions, resulting in the contrasts of interest: 1) win RPE and 2) loss RPE. The following two contrasts were constructed to detect activation which was greater in the emotional condition compared to the neutral condition: 3) win RPE [emotional > neutral] and 4) loss RPE [emotional > neutral].
At the group level, contrasts were submitted to separate mixed effects analyses (FLAME1), modelling the effect of group (HC, NTR, or TRS) on BOLD signal. Whole-brain activation differences between groups were tested for win RPE and loss RPE. In order to detect subcortical RPE activation we conducted an ROI analysis using a binary subcortical mask consisting of the bilateral striatum and thalamus (anatomically defined from the probabilistic Harvard Oxford Subcortical Structural Atlas thresholded at 30%). Broad inclusion of all structures of the striatum as well as the thalamus was based on the fact that subcortical RPE signaling was detected in each of these regions in a meta-analysis and dysfunctions in schizophrenia have also been observed in both striatum and thalamus.
In order to assess the differential effect of emotional bias on RPE-related signal, analyses of the win RPE [emotional > neutral] and loss RPE [emotional > neutral] contrasts included emotional bias as a covariate, and group × bias interaction effects were assessed. Significant clusters were determined by a voxelwise z-threshold of 2.3 and a cluster significance threshold of p=0.05 (whole-brain family wise error corrected for multiple comparisons).
Correlation analyses were conducted between key positive symptoms (delusion and hallucinations) and significant clusters of RPE-related activation detected in the subcortical ROI analysis, and are reported where significant.