Title.
Polygenic risk score for schizophrenia and structural brain connectivity in older age: A longitudinal connectome and tractography study.
Abstract.
Higher polygenic risk score for schizophrenia (szPGRS) has been associated with lower cognitive function and might be a predictor of decline in brain structure in apparently healthy populations. Age-related declines in structural brain connectivity—measured using white matter diffusion MRI —are evident from cross-sectional data. Yet, it remains unclear how graph theoretical metrics of the structural connectome change over time, and whether szPGRS is associated with differences in ageing-related changes in human brain connectivity. Here, we studied a large, relatively healthy, same-year-of-birth, older age cohort over a period of 3 years (age ∼ 73 years, N = 731; age ∼76 years, N = 488). From their brain scans we derived tract-averaged fractional anisotropy (FA) and mean diffusivity (MD), and network topology properties. We investigated the cross-sectional and longitudinal associations between these structural brain variables and szPGRS. Higher szPGRS showed significant associations with longitudinal increases in MD in the splenium (β = 0.132, pFDR = 0.040), arcuate (β = 0.291, pFDR = 0.040), anterior thalamic radiations (β = 0.215, pFDR = 0.040) and cingulum (β = 0.165, pFDR = 0.040). Significant declines over time were observed in graph theory metrics for FA-weighted networks, such as mean edge weight (β = −0.039, pFDR = 0.048) and strength (β = −0.027, pFDR = 0.048). No significant associations were found between szPGRS and graph theory metrics. These results are consistent with the hypothesis that szPGRS confers risk for ageing-related degradation of some aspects of structural connectivity.
Highlights.
Large longitudinal MRI study of brain structure in narrow age range older age cohort.
Longitudinal changes occur in white matter tracts from age 73 to 76.
Graph theory metrics also showed longitudinal reductions over that period.
Microstructural changes in white matter correlate with changes in brain’s network.
Higher genetic risk for schizophrenia is associated with changes in brain structure.
Introduction.
Patients with schizophrenia show white matter impairments in post-mortem examinations and in in vivo studies using diffusion MRI. Less healthy brain white matter microstructure and the structural connectome have been associated with cognitive impairments in schizophrenia. Reports of less healthy water diffusion MRI parameters in schizophrenia are well documented; specifically, impairments are observed in the uncinate fasciculus, corpus callosum, cingulum and arcuate fasciculus. Likewise, healthy relatives who are at high risk of developing schizophrenia for genetic reasons also show white matter abnormalities in several tracts.
Graph theory segregation measures, such as clustering coefficient and modularity, have been reported to be altered in schizophrenia, suggesting a more segregated pattern of network organization. Longer path lengths and reductions in communication efficiency between regions have also been found in patients diagnosed with schizophrenia, suggesting that schizophrenia may be characterised by reduced communication between distal brain regions (reviewed in). Graph theoretical studies have also reported small-world organization and reductions in integration and efficiency in unaffected relatives, indicating a genetic basis for schizophrenia. Despite the difficulties of coupling graph theory metrics and the underlying neurobiology, graph theory metrics have consistently shown associations with cognitive functions, symptoms, heritability and sensitivity to disease, indicating that they do compute relevant properties of the brain's structure in this disorder.
Schizophrenia is both highly heritable and polygenic, with many common alleles of small effect, and increasing numbers of genome-wide significant loci being identified as sample sizes increase. The largest twin study in schizophrenia to date estimated its heritability to be 79%, and the proband-wise concordance rate in monozygotic twins to be 33%, suggesting that illness vulnerability is partly, but not exclusively, due to genetic factors. The latest schizophrenia genome wide association study (GWAS) included a meta-analysis with 40675 cases and 64643 controls; it identified 179 independent genome-wide significant single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) (P < 5 × 10−8) associated with a diagnosis of schizophrenia. Summary statistics from large-scale GWAS allow the degree of genetic liability for a heritable trait (in this case, schizophrenia) to be estimated in healthy subjects outside the population in which the original GWAS was conducted.
In addition to schizophrenia, advancing age is associated with an increased risk for neurodegeneration, including white matter microstructure and cognitive decline. Therefore, identifying the determinants of the degree to which an individual experiences these cognitive and brain declines with age is a high priority. In ageing populations, a higher genetic risk for schizophrenia has been associated with both poorer cognitive function and with less healthy white matter. However, the neurobiological underpinnings of these apparent differences in cognitive ageing have not yet been fully explored.
Thus far, only a small number of studies have analysed the relationship between polygenic risk score for schizophrenia (szPGRS) and neuroimaging biomarkers in healthy and patient samples. Emerging evidence suggests that higher szPGRS might be a predictor of accelerated decline in brain microstructure in older age. reported a significant longitudinal association between szPGRS and a general factor of tract-averaged mean diffusivity (MD; β = −0.120, SE = 0.059, p = 0.041, where a negative association indicates a link with unhealthy ageing), using a threshold of p = 1.00 derived from a previous GWAS and 3-year change in the same dataset presented here (the Lothian Birth Cohort, 1936; LBC 1936). This nominal association did not, however, survive correction for multiple comparisons. Nevertheless, the largest published schizophrenia GWAS to date has improved considerably its predictive power and fibre tracking and analysis have been updated significantly to improve tract segmentation in this sample. These developments allow a more thorough investigation of the relationships between genetic risk for schizophrenia and structural brain connectivity in this ageing population than has hitherto been possible.
In this paper, we therefore investigated the hypothesis that szPGRS relates to white matter microstructure in older age by first mapping the trajectories of water diffusion MRI parameters (using fractional anisotropy (FA) and mean diffusivity (MD)) measured in twelve major tracts and the topological properties of FA-weighted networks in the LBC1936 across a three-year period. Secondly, we investigated the effect of szPGRS on these longitudinal tractography and connectome microstructural properties. We hypothesised that there would be a decline in brain connectivity (water diffusion MRI parameters and connectome network properties) over time, and that lower initial levels and steeper declines in these brain parameters would be found in those subjects with higher genetic liability for schizophrenia. As an additional analysis, we also investigated the hypothesis that higher szPGRS is associated with a steeper decline in cognition via change in white matter structure in older age.
Methods.
Participants.
The LBC1936 study provides longitudinal data on cognitive and brain ageing. The cohort comprises participants of the Scottish Mental Survey of 1947 (SMS 1947, n = 70,805) in which most Scottish schoolchildren born in 1936 sat the Moray House Test Number 12 at ∼11 years of age. Most participants resided in the Edinburgh and Lothian regions of Scotland at recruitment age ∼70 years. The sample has been repeatedly tested in later life with participants undergoing detailed medical, physical, and psycho-social assessments, including a brain MRI examination. The first testing wave took place at a mean age of 69.53 years (SD, 0.83 years) in 2004–2007 (n = 1,091, 543 females); the second testing wave took place at a mean age of 72.49 years (SD, 0.71 years) in 2007–2010 (n = 866, 418 females); and the third testing wave took place at a mean age of 76.25 years (SD, 0.68 years) in 2011–2014 (n = 697, 337 females). The data in the present report come from the second and third waves of the study at which points structural brain imaging was performed. A total of 731 participants (343 females) agreed to undergo brain imaging at a mean age of 72.68 years (SD, 0.72 years), and 488 (228 females) at a mean age of 76.38 years (SD, 0.65 years), none of whom were known to have schizophrenia. Only one participant was diagnosed with bipolar disorder. However, the data indicated that this participant was not an outlier ( ±2.5 SD for all brain imaging measures) and therefore, this subject was not excluded from the analysis. The study was approved by the Multi-Centre Research Ethics Committee for Scotland (MREC/01/0/56), the Lothian Research Ethics Committee (LREC/2003/2/29) and the Scotland A Research Ethics Committee (07/MRE00/58). All participants completed written informed consent forms before any cognitive, MRI, or other measurements were taken.
Scan acquisition.
All structural and diffusion MRI data were acquired using a GE Signa Horizon HDx 1.5 T clinical scanner (General Electric, Milwaukee, WI, USA) using a self-shielding gradient set with maximum gradient strength of 33 mT m−1, and eight-channel head array coil. Diffusion-weighted echo-planar volumes (b = 1000 s mm−2) were acquired in 64 non-collinear directions, along with seven T2-weighted volumes (b = 0 s mm−2). Each volume comprised seventy-two contiguous axial 2-mm-thick slices acquired with 2 × 2 mm in-plane resolution. Repetition and echo times were 16.5 s and 95.5 m s respectively. A 3D T1-weighted inversion recovery-prepared fast spoiled gradient-echo (FSPGR) volume was also acquired in the coronal plane with 160 contiguous slices and 1.3 mm3 voxel dimensions. Full details of the imaging protocol are available. The scanner underwent a major upgrade just prior to the first wave of imaging and was regulated continuously within a tight quality control environment across the duration of the study; all scans were acquired with the same imaging protocol and scanner software platform throughout.
Image processing.
Each 3D T1-weighted FSPGR volume was parcellated into 85 cortical regions-of-interest (ROI) using FreeSurfer (http://surfer.nmr.mgh.harvard.edu), which comprised 34 cortical ROIs and eight sub-cortical ROIs per hemisphere, plus the brainstem. Segmentations were visually checked, then used to construct grey and white matter masks for use in network construction and to constrain the tractography output as described below. Using tools provided by the FDT package in FSL (http://fsl.fmrib.ox.ac.uk/fsl), the diffusion MRI data were pre-processed to reduce systematic imaging distortions and bulk subject motion artefacts by afﬁne registration of all subsequent EP volumes to the ﬁrst T2-weighted EP volume. Skull stripping and brain extraction were performed on the registered T2-weighted EP volumes and applied to the mean diffusivity/fractional anisotropy (MD/FA) volumes calculated by DTIFIT in each subject. The neuroanatomical ROIs determined by FreeSurfer were then aligned from 3D T1-weighted volume to diffusion space using a cross-modal nonlinear registration method. As a ﬁrst step, linear registration was used to initialize the alignment of each brain-extracted FA volume to the corresponding FreeSurfer extracted 3D T1-weighted brain volume using a mutual information cost function and an afﬁne transform with 12 degrees of freedom. Following this initialization, a nonlinear deformation ﬁeld based method (FNIRT) was used to reﬁne local alignment. FreeSurfer segmentations and anatomical labels were then aligned to diffusion space using nearest neighbour interpolation.
Tractography.
Whole-brain probabilistic tractography was performed using FSL's BedpostX/ProbTrackX algorithm. Probability density functions, which describe the uncertainty in the principal directions of water diffusion, were computed using a two-ﬁbre model per voxel. Twelve major tracts were identified in each participant using probabilistic neighbourhood tractography (PNT), as implemented in the TractoR package for fibre tracking and analysis (http://www.tractor-mri.org.uk/; PNT is an automatic tract segmentation method that has shown good reproducibility. This technique optimizes the choice of seed point placement for tractography by estimating the best matching tract from a series of candidate tracts generated from a neighbourhood of voxels (typically 7 × 7 × 7) placed around a central voxel transferred from standard to native space against a reference tract that was derived from a group of healthy volunteers aged 25–64 years. The topological tract model was also used to reject any false positive connections, thereby significantly improving tract segmentation. The seed point best matching each tract to the reference was determined in this manner and probabilistic white matter tracts masks were reconstructed by sampling 5000 streamlines. All segmented white matter tracts were visually assessed to ensure they were an anatomically accurate representation of the fasciculi-of-interest. The resulting tractography masks were applied to the MD/FA volumes of each participant; this permitted tract-specific mean values of FA and MD, weighted by the connection probability, to be obtained for each tract in each subject. The twelve tracts segmented were the genu and splenium of corpus callosum, and bilateral cingulum, anterior thalamic radiations (ATR), arcuate, uncinate and inferior longitudinal fasciculi.
Structural connectome.
Using the probability density functions generated from BedpostX/ProbTractX, streamlines were then constructed by sampling from these distributions during a tracking process that involved all white matter voxels using 100 Markov Chain Monte Carlo iterations with a ﬁxed step size of 0.5 mm between successive points. Tracking was initiated from all white matter voxels in two collinear directions until terminated by the following stopping criteria designed to minimize the amount of anatomically implausible streamlines: (i) exceeding a curvature threshold of 70°; (ii) entering a voxel with FA below 0.1; (iii) entering an extra-cerebral voxel; (iv) exceeding 200 mm in length; and (v) exceeding a distance ratio metric of 10. The distance ratio metric, excludes implausibly tortuous streamlines. For instance, a streamline with a total path length 10 times longer than the distance between end points was considered to be invalid. The values of the curvature, anisotropy and distance ratio metric constraints were set empirically and informed by visual assessment of the resulting streamlines.
Network construction.
FA-weighted networks were constructed by recording the mean FA value along streamlines connecting all 85 ROI (network node) pairs from the default FreeSurfer cortical and subcortical regions. The endpoint of a streamline was considered to be the ﬁrst grey matter ROI encountered when tracking from the seed location. The average brain network across the cohort was determined by including those connections which occurred in more than 2/3 of the participants at baseline. This baseline network mask was then propagated to the second wave of connectivity matrices. Organizational properties of the different networks were then obtained using the brain connectivity toolbox (www.brain-connectivity-toolbox.net). For each FA-weighted connectivity matrix for the average network, five global network measures were computed, namely mean edge weight (mean value of FA across the network), density (the fraction of present connections to possible connections), strength (the average sum of weights per node), clustering coefﬁcient (fraction of triangles around a node) and global efﬁciency (the average of the inverse shortest path length).
Polygenic risk score calculation.
The majority of participants provided blood samples at the first testing wave (age 70 years) that were used to extract DNA for the genetic analyses. To measure single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) we used the Illumina 610-Quadv1 whole-genome SNP array; measurements were completed at the Wellcome Trust Clinical Research Facility Genetics Core, Western General Hospital, Edinburgh (https://www.wtcrf.ed.ac.uk). Stringent quality control analyses were applied to the genotype data which resulted in 549692 of the 599011 SNPs on the Illumina 610 chip being retained in 3511 individuals (2115 females). The sample collection, quality control and genotyping process is described in greater detail elsewhere and non-European individuals were carefully excluded from the current analysis. PGRS summarise the small effects across all SNPs that contribute to the genetic liability of a phenotype (in this case, schizophrenia). The out-of-sample validation of the capacity of szPGRS to predict onset of schizophrenia has been reported to explain 24.43% (the estimate assumes a population risk of 1%) of the variance in liability. szPGRS were created for all individuals with suitable genotype data; only genotypes passing stringent quality control were used in analyses. szPGRS were estimated using the recent summary data from a GWAS of schizophrenia comprising a meta-analysis of two studies, which included 40675 cases and 64643 controls. szPGRS were estimated using the PRSice software package according to previously described protocols, with linkage disequilibrium and distance thresholds for clumping of r2 = 0.2 and within a 250 kb window. Five scores were created for each individual using SNPs selected according to the significance of their association with the phenotype at nominal p-value thresholds of 0.01, 0.05, 0.1, 0.5 and 1.0 (all SNPs). Our primary analyses used scores generated from a list of SNPs with a GWAS training set of p ≤ 1.0 threshold as recommended previously in order to allow replication by other studies and to maximise the potential predictive capacity. However, results at p ≤ 0.1 and p ≤ 0.5 thresholds are presented in Supplementary Material Tables 3 and 4 Four multidimensional scaling factors (estimated from SNP data) were entered into the models as additional ‘nuisance’ covariates to control for population stratification, along with age. These multidimensional scaling factors have been previously identified to be adequate for accounting for population structure in this sample.
Statistical analyses.
First, age-related changes for white matter tract MD/FA values and global graph theory measures were calculated using linear mixed models for those participants who completed both assessments. The package used for the linear mixed models was 'nlme' in R and standardised betas were reported. Age in days at the time of MRI acquisition and sex were entered as fixed effects and participant as a random effect. Moreover, for each connectivity metric, residuals were calculated from a linear regression predicting each metric from density (fraction of present connections to possible connections), and these were used in all analyses. This is because several global graph theory metrics depend on density and comparisons at constant density allow differences related to the topological reorganization of links to be assessed longitudinally. The use of graph theory to study network topology is a valuable framework while also being a challenging task. For instance, the number of nodes (N) or network's degree (k) will influence the computation of global theory metrics (see Brain Connectivity Toolbox for a detailed description of metrics: https://sites.google.com/site/bctnet). Therefore, comparing networks with different N or k can yield spurious results. Instead of restraining all networks to a fixed k parameter, we chose to control each subject's graph theory measure for edge density. Therefore, models presented below compute density as a fixed effect for each graph metric. This allowed us to compare metrics longitudinally independently of their differences in density.
We then estimated a structural equation model (SEM) for each white matter tract MD/FA values and global graph theory measures. We estimated a separate model for each MRI metric (density-corrected network metric or white matter tract MD/FA value), which were set as the dependent variable in each model. Latent change score models were used to assess associations of szPGRS with the cross-sectional (baseline level, age ∼73 years) and longitudinal change (73–76 years) in diffusion MRI parameters. Latent scores were derived from bilateral white matter tracts. We constrained the loadings for left and right tracts across waves to be equal (i.e. the left loadings were equal across waves and independent of right loadings). For interhemispheric white matter tracts (genu and splenium) and graph theory metrics, we used a single indicator model. Fig. 1 shows a simplified diagram of the SEM framework. Within the model, each brain imaging measure was adjusted for its respective age in days at the time of scanning and sex at the manifest level, while szPGRS was adjusted for sex and population stratification components. Due to the apparent association between schizophrenia and cardiovascular disease, we adjusted the linear mixed models and latent change score models for high blood pressure at each time point in order to reject the hypothesis that higher cardiovascular risk may contribute to a steeper decline in diffusion MRI parameters over time. For each model, we tested the association at the brain baseline level and change with szPGRS. SEM was performed using the package 'lavaan' in R with full-information maximum likelihood estimation to use all data available.
As an additional analysis, we examined the hypothesis that higher szPGRS was associated with a steeper decline in cognition via change in white matter structure. We used SEM in the ‘lavaan’ package with full-information maximum likelihood estimation to derived a latent score of general fluid intelligence (gf) for each wave from six non-verbal tests of cognitive function from the Weschler Adult Intelligence Scale IIIUK: matrix reasoning (non-verbal reasoning), block design (constructional ability), symbol search and digit symbol (processing speed), letter number sequencing and digit span backwards (working memory). Within the model, each cognitive test was adjusted for age in days at the time of assessment and sex at the manifest level. We constrained the loadings for each individual raw score across waves (i.e. equal loadings for matrix reasoning at baseline and follow-up). Beyond the analyses of szPGRS to the mediator (A path), to test whether the mediation (change from path C to C′) was statistically significant (pFDR < 0.05), we tested whether the direct path of szPGRS to gf (path C) and the indirect path from the mediator to gf (path B) were significant. Fig. 2 shows a simplified diagram of the model that was used to examine this hypothesis. All significance (p) values (α = 0.05) were corrected for multiple comparisons using false discovery rate (FDR, pFDR).