Title.
Bayesian computational markers of relapse in methamphetamine dependence.
Abstract.
Methamphetamine use disorder is associated with a high likelihood of relapse. Identifying robust predictors of relapse that have explanatory power is critical to develop secondary prevention based on a mechanistic understanding of relapse. Computational approaches have the potential to identify such predictive markers of psychiatric illness, with the advantage of providing a finer mechanistic explanation of the cognitive processes underlying psychiatric vulnerability.
In this study, sixty-two recently sober methamphetamine-dependent individuals were recruited from a 28-day inpatient treatment program, and completed a Stop Signal Task (SST) while undergoing functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). These individuals were prospectively followed for 1 year and assessed for relapse to methamphetamine use. Thirty-three percent of followed participants reported relapse.
We found that neural activity associated with two types of Bayesian prediction error, i.e. the difference between actual and expected need to stop on a given trial, significantly differentiated those individuals who remained abstinent and those who relapsed. Specifically, relapsed individuals exhibited smaller neural activations to such Bayesian prediction errors relative to those individuals who remained abstinent in the left temporoparietal junction (Cohen's d = 0.91), the left inferior frontal gyrus (Cohen's d = 0.57), and left anterior insula (Cohen's d = 0.63). In contrast, abstinent and relapsed participants did not differ in neural activation to non-model based task contrasts or on various self-report clinical measures.
In conclusion, Bayesian cognitive models may help identify predictive biomarkers of relapse, while providing a computational explanation of belief processing and updating deficits in individuals with methamphetamine use disorder.
Highlights.
Methamphetamine-dependent individuals (MDI) face a high rate of relapse after treatment.
Can a Bayesian learning modeling and fMRI be used to identify markers of relapse?
MDI who relapsed within 1 year have smaller activation to Bayesian model-based prediction errors.
Such neural pattern was observed in left temporo-parietal junction, IFG, and anterior insula.
MDI more likely to relapse show weaker tracking of uncertainty and updating of their belief model.
Introduction.
Methamphetamine use disorder is associated with a high likelihood of and short time-span to relapse. Identifying precise and robust predictors of relapse is therefore essential for improving the prevention and treatment of this disorder. Generative computational models have the potential to precisely disambiguate and quantify complex cognitive processes, which may in turn be used to identify specific neuro-cognitive treatment targets for a personalized approach to treating addictive disorders.
Recently, we showed that both healthy individuals and stimulant users continuously alter their response strategy in a standard inhibitory paradigm (stop-signal task, SST), such that dynamic fluctuations in their reaction time and performance are consistent with a Bayesian sequential adjustment of their beliefs and decision strategy. Whereas standard behavioral measures to assess performance in the SST, such as mean stop-signal reaction time (SSRT) or stop signal asynchrony dependent error rate, are relatively easy to obtain, Bayes-optimal model parameters have the advantage that they provide quantitative explanatory measures of an underlying putative cognitive process. Moreover, the model can be used to simulate data to better elucidate how behavioral dysfunctions emerge as a consequence of altered underlying cognitive processes. Here, we use a similar Bayesian approach combined with fast event-related fMRI to model methamphetamine-dependent individuals' real-time beliefs about the need to stop in the SST, and isolate neural markers of relapse one year after treatment. We aimed to determine whether those computational neural markers of inhibitory function can meaningfully distinguish methamphetamine-dependent individuals who remain abstinent from those who relapse within a year.
Based on recent studies pointing to weaker and less efficient neural encoding of Bayesian expectations of a stop response in the SST, and associated abnormalities in neural tracking of Bayesian prediction errors (i.e. difference between probability and actual occurrence of a stop signal on a given trial) in occasional stimulant users and methamphetamine-dependent individuals, we hypothesized that weaker or less efficient neural responses associated with Bayesian prediction errors would be observed in relapsed relative to abstinent individuals. Clusters in the inferior frontal gyrus (IFG; e.g., Brodmann area 44, 47) and overlapping the interior insula bilaterally, as well in the pre-Supplementary Motor Area (SMA) have been robustly implicated in guiding inhibitory function. In those regions, both structural deficits (reduced integrity of white matter fibers) and functional alterations have been observed in stimulant addicted individuals. Larger activation patterns to unsigned Bayesian prediction errors in the SST have also been observed among occasional stimulant users progressing to problem use in a region overlapping the right anterior insula and IFG. Based on these combined findings, we expected abnormal prediction error activations in the IFG/anterior insula regions to be associated with more severe addictive profiles and thus with relapse status one year after treatment.
The anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) and anterior insula have also been robustly linked to encoding of prediction errors and more generally expectancy violation in a wide range of cognitive task, but notably in the SST. At the computational level, both regions have been shown to encode volatility and the tracking of unexpected changes in the environment. Using a similar modeling approach as used here, found that a region in the dorsal ACC overlapping pre-SMA was robustly associated with neural activation to an unsigned Bayesian prediction error in the SST, while we showed that occasional stimulant use was assoviated with weaker activations to the same type of prediction error in similar, albeit more caudal region of the ACC and in the posterior insular cortex. Based on this research, we hypothesized that weaker or abnormal neural signals in those regions would be associated with less efficient tracking of model-based uncertainty and thus more apparent in relapsed individuals.
Finally, the superior temporal gyrus, specifically the temporoparietal junction, has been associated with dynamic learning and anticipatory processes, including proactive inhibition, i.e. the anticipation of the need to stop in the SST. The left temporoparietal junction, in particular, is involved in mathematical computations and has recently been implicated in Bayesian learning. Given consistent evidence of learning deficits, and findings of hypo-activations of the superior temporal gyrus and temporoparietal junction during learning-based decision-making in methamphetamine dependence, we therefore expected potential computational learning inefficiencies to be reflected in weaker recruitment of this brain region among individuals more susceptible to relapse.
Taken together, recent computational evidence suggests altered Bayesian learning during inhibitory control tasks such as the SST in stimulant users of varying clinical severity. Given that areas identified above are both critical to inhibitory control implementation and have been linked to recruitment abnormalities in stimulant users during inhibitory control, we hypothesized that among individuals diagnosed with methamphetamine dependence, those more likely to relapse would exhibit less efficient inhibitory learning as reflected by weaker neural responses associated with anticipation and belief updating. We predicted these weaker neural signals would be particularly observable in regions key to inhibitory control and inhibitory learning, including the IFG, anterior insula, ACC, and temporoparietal junction.
Methods.
Participants.
The study protocol was approved by the UCSD Human Research Protections Program and all subjects gave written informed consent. Sixty-two (21% female) recently sober methamphetamine-dependent individuals were recruited from a 28-day inpatient Alcohol and Drug Treatment Program at the Veterans Affairs San Diego Healthcare System and Scripps Green Hospital (La Jolla, CA; cross-sectional analysis of these data published elsewhere). All study procedures, including the neuroimaging session examining brain and behavior responses during the SST, occurred during the third or fourth week of treatment for all participants (i.e., all had been abstinent from methamphetamine or any other drugs, including alcohol, for 3–4 weeks). To maintain sobriety during the program, participants were screened for the presence of drugs via random urine toxicology or whenever they left the facility, and were terminated from the program if tested positive. Participants also performed the North American Adult Reading Test as a measure of verbal intelligence, and completed self-report measures of personality and affective measures previously associated with stimulant addiction vulnerability, including the Barratt Impulsiveness Scale (BIS-11), the Sensation Seeking Scale (SSS-V), and the Beck Depression Inventory (BDI).
Lifetime DSM-IV Axis I and II diagnoses at baseline were assessed with the Semi Structured Assessment for the Genetics of Alcoholism and based on consensus meetings with the supervising clinician and trained study personnel, including a Masters-level research assistant and postdoctoral-level psychologist (see Supplementary Text 1 for exclusion criteria). Methamphetamine dependence, and not DSM-5 diagnosis of methamphetamine use disorder, was assessed because DSM-IV was in effect at the start of the study. Participants were contacted one year later for a brief structured phone interview to assess for any use of methamphetamine, level of use, and time of relapse. At baseline, we also assessed for use and abuse/dependence criteria for other drugs (i.e., sedatives, hallucinogens, marijuana, cocaine or opiates) in the past year, as part of a larger longitudinal study, which also followed individuals with other primary drugs of abuse. For all participants in this study, methamphetamine was confirmed as participants' drug of choice. Relapse was defined as use of methamphetamine at any point during the follow-up period, while some participants may have additionally relapsed to any of these other substances (not assessed at follow-up). Based on interview responses, thirty-nine methamphetamine-dependent individuals remained abstinent from methamphetamine from the time of treatment to one-year follow-up. Nineteen individuals reported that they relapsed. Four participants could not be tracked.
Stop signal task.
Participants completed a stop-signal task (6 blocks of 48 trials) while undergoing fMRI. On 216 go trials (75% of all trials), they had to press as fast as possible the left button when an ‘X' appeared or the right button when an ‘O' appeared. On 72 stop trials (25% of all trials), they heard a tone shortly after onset of the go stimulus, which instructed them not to press either button. Each trial lasted around 1300 ms, and trials were separated by a 200-ms inter-stimulus intervals (blank screen). Individuals' reaction time (time from stimulus onset to button press) provided a natural jitter. The sequence of trial types presented was pseudo-randomized. Finally, prior to scanning, participants completed the SST outside the scanner to determine their mean ‘Go’ reaction time (MRT). This measure was then used to determine the stop signal delay (SSD) for six different types stop trial of increasing difficulty, providing a subject-dependent jittered reference function. Specifically, stop signals were delivered in equal amounts at MRT-0 ms, MRT-100 ms, MRT-200 ms, MRT-300 ms, MRT-400 ms, and MRT-500 ms providing an individually customized range of difficulty; see Supplementary Text 2 for task instructions).
Bayesian model of the inhibitory response expectation.
To model behavior, we used a Bayes-optimal Dynamic Belief Model, which has been robustly established to capture behavioral adjustments in the SST in both healthy individuals and substance users. The model assumes that one 1) updates the prior probability of encountering stop trials, P(stop), on a trial-by-trial basis based on trial history, and 2) adjusts behavior as a function of P(stop) with higher predicted P(stop) prompting slower Go RT and higher likelihood of correctly stopping on a stop trial. Mathematically, on each trial k, Pk(stop) is the mean of the predictive distribution p(rk|sk-1), which is a mixture of the previous posterior distribution and a fixed prior distribution, with α and 1 − α acting as the mixing coefficients, respectively, and where Sk = (s1, …,sk) is 1 on stop trials and 0 on go trials:
with the posterior distribution being updated according to Bayes' Rule:
In this study, model parameters for the beta distribution p0(r) and α were kept constant across all participants, based on prior simulations that sought to optimize behavioral fit at the group level, i.e., maximizing the goodness-of-fit of the linear regression of P(Stop) on RT across all participants (see Supplementary Text 3). A fixed setting of p0 = Beta(a = 2.5,b = 7.5; s = a + b = 10; mean = 0.25) was used, and alpha was fit to participants' data (range tested: 0.25–1.0; α = 0.5 maximized overall fit across all participants; see Fig. 1A for P(stop) sequence).
Image acquisition and preprocessing.
Using a fast event-related fMRI design, six T2*-weighted EPI functional runs were collected for each participant, along with one T1-weighted anatomical image. Each scanning session was conducted on a 3 T General Electric scanner with the following parameters: T2*-weighted EPI, repetition time = 2000 ms, echo time = 40 ms, 64 × 64 matrix, 30 4-mm axial slices, FOV = 220 × 220 mm, in-plane voxel size = 3.437, and flip angle = 90o. Each run included 256 repetitions for a length of 8 min and 32 s. Functional volume acquisitions were time-locked to task onset. During the same experimental session, we collected a T1-weighted image (MPRAGE, TR = 11.4 ms, TE = 4.4 ms, flip angle = 10 degree, FOV = 256 × 256, 1 mm3 voxels) to be used for anatomical reference. All structural and functional image processing and analysis was performed with the Analysis of Functional Neuroimages (AFNI) software package, and MRI x-y slices were reconstructed into AFNI BRIK format. Echoplanar images underwent automatic coregistration to the anatomical image and each participant dataset was visually inspected to confirm successful alignment. Outlier voxels were identified in the aligned images based on whether a given time point greatly exceeded the mean number of voxel outliers for the time-series. Time points with high numbers of outlier voxels were excluded from subsequent analyses.
First-level fMRI analyses.
In a first general linear model (GLM), Go, Stop Success/SS, and Stop Error/SE trials were distinguished and convolved with a canonical hemodynamic response function (Go Error trials were scarce and not included in these analyses). Each was entered as both categorical and P(stop)-modulated regressor (i.e., Go, SS, SE, GoxPk(stop), SSxPk(stop), and SExPk(stop)). To more specifically isolate neural activity related to belief updating processes vs uncertainty tracking, a second GLM was created with two types of trial-wise Bayesian prediction errors as parametric regressors, representing the discrepancy between expected likelihood of having to stop on the upcoming trial (i.e., P(stop)) and actual trial type observed (i.e., Go = 0, Stop = 1). These regressors included in this order the signed prediction error (SPE = outcome-P(stop) = sk-Pk(stop)) and the unsigned prediction error (UPE = |outcome-Pk(stop)| = |sk-Pk(stop)|; see Fig. 1A, bottom), as well as trial error (0 = correct or 1 = error) to control for performance error related activity. Each of these regressors were orthogonalized with respect to the preceding one given the non-trivial collinearity between them. Both GLMs included the following regressors of no-interest: a baseline regressor (inter-trial intervals), three linear drift regressors (x,y,z), and three motion regressors (pitch, yaw, roll), and Go RTs (residualized with respect to P(stop)) to control for motor response confounds. Images were spatially filtered (Gaussian full width half maximum 4 mm) to account for individual anatomical differences. Automated Talairach transformations were applied to anatomical images and functional images were subsequently transformed into Talairach space. Percent signal change (%SC) was determined by dividing the signal for each regressor of interest by the baseline regressor.
Second-level analyses.
At the between-subject level, two types of voxelwise mixed-effects linear models (LME) were fit to the coefficients of our first-level GLM. In the first LME, we first tested for the interaction of clinical status (abstinent vs relapsed) and modulation of P(Stop) under each Go vs Stop trials (i.e, GoxP(stop) vs StopxPk(stop), SS and SE were averaged), with subject treated as random intercept effect. Whole brain statistical maps were obtained for the group main effect (reflecting areas tracking a clinical status group difference in prior P(stop) value irrespective of trial type) and the clinical status X P(stop) modulated trial type interaction. In order to assess for potential group difference in the modulation of trial accuracy (i.e., successful vs failed inhibition) by P(stop), a similar LME approach was used. Specifically, we obtained statistical maps for the main effect of clinical status (reflecting potential group difference in P(stop) activation on Stop trials irrespective of accuracy) and for the clinical status X P(stop) modulated trial type (SE vs SS) interaction. To correct for multiple comparisons, we used a cluster threshold adjustment based on Monte Carlo simulations (generated with AFNI's 3dClustSim program). We first calculated spatial autocorrelation function (acf) parameters from the 1st glm model residuals, using the 3dFHWMx function (which does not assume a purely Gaussian acf function, but rather a mixture of Gaussian and mono-exponential). The obtained parameters, averaged across participants, were fed to the 3dClustSim function to determine FWER corrected cluster size. Based on the simulations, a minimum cluster volume of 896 μL was found to be sufficient to correct for multiple comparisons at FWER = p < .05 with a minimum voxelwise significant threshold of p < .005. While less conservative than using a p < .001 or p < .002 voxelwise threshold, this setting provides a balance of adequate correction for multiple comparisons while ensuring a substantial minimum cluster size. We also note that this threshold is still relatively conservative in light of previous work having applied this Bayesian computational model in similar populations and experimental settings, which would provide grounds for a more focused search within the brain based on regions of interest. Finally, within the regions identified with those LMEs, we identified those that were consistent with a potential group difference in either type of Bayesian prediction errors (UPE or SPE), using our second GLM for regions of interest (ROI) analyses. Moreover, for regions consistent with a group main effect or group X trial type interaction, we specifically checked for convergence between results from the second GLM and the pattern of activation to P(Stop) as function of trial type (first GLM). Specifically, regions with non-zero P(stop) activations of opposite signs or with the same signs across Go and Stop trials, should be consistent with a significant group difference in UPE and SPE activations, respectively. This is because an SPE is equal to 0 - P(stop) = − P(stop) on Go trials, and SPE = 1 – P(stop) on Stop trials, and thus negatively correlated with P(stop) on both type of trials. In contrast, UPE is equal to |0 - P(stop)| = P(stop) on Go trials and to |1 - P(stop)| = 1 – P(stop) on Stop trials, and thus should be positively correlated on Go trials but negatively correlated with P(stop) on Stop trials (see.