Title.
Cortical substrates of cue-reactivity in multiple substance dependent populations: transdiagnostic relevance of the medial prefrontal cortex.
Abstract.
Elevated drug-cue elicited brain activity is one of the most widely cited, transdiagnostically relevant traits of substance dependent populations. These populations, however, are typically studied in isolation. The goal of this study was to prospectively investigate the spatial topography of drug-cue reactivity in a large set of individuals dependent on either cocaine, alcohol, or nicotine. Functional MRI data was acquired from 156 substance dependent individuals (55 cocaine, 53 alcohol, and 48 nicotine) as they performed a standardized drug-cue exposure task. Clusters of significant activation to drug-cues relative to neutral cues (‘hot spots’) were isolated for each individual. K-means clustering was used to classify the spatial topography of the hotspots in the data set. The percentage of hotspots that would be reached at several distances (2–5 cm) of transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) were calculated. One hundred and three participants had at least one cluster of significant frontal cortex activity (66%). K-means revealed 3 distinct clusters within the medial prefrontal cortex (MPFC), left inferior frontal gyrus/insula, right premotor cortex. For the group as a whole (and for alcohol users and nicotine users independently), medial prefrontal cortex (BA 10) was the location of the greatest number of hotspots. The frontal pole was cortical location closest to the largest percentage of hotspots. While there is individual variability in the location of the cue-elicited ‘hot spot’ these data demonstrate that elevated BOLD signal to drug cues in the MPFC may be a transdiagnostic endophenotype of addiction which may also be a fruitful neuromodulation target.
Introduction.
Elevated drug-cue elicited brain activity is one of the most widely cited, transdiagnostically relevant traits of current substance dependent populations. Many studies investigating cue-reactivity in either cocaine, nicotine, or alcohol dependent populations have independently demonstrated that drug-cues evoke elevated activity in the medial prefrontal cortex, anterior cingulate, and insula cortex. Most of these studies focus on one substance using class, however, and therefore it is difficult to distinguish which aspects of cue-reactivity are transdiagnostic biomarkers of the addiction process versus those which are specific to alcohol, cocaine, or nicotine dependence.
Several retrospective meta-analyses have demonstrated that the medial prefrontal cortex and cingulate cortex are reliably activated to drug cues. Other meta-analyses have demonstrated that activity in these brain regions may predict relapse across multiple substances. ( Addiction Biology). One challenge for retrospective reviews and meta-analyses however, is that different research institutions often use different drug-cue reactivity paradigms, have different inclusion/exclusion criteria, and do not analyze all of their data using the same analysis pipeline. Furthermore, even when these variables are controlled, there is a lot of individual variability in the brain response to drug-cues and that there may be drug-class specific patterns of cue-reactivity.
While the localization of cue-reactivity in the brain is important for many reasons, it is now particularly important as multiple fields are seeking to develop brain stimulation as a treatment tool. Recent interest has developed in whether one can attenuate this cue-elicited craving through brain stimulation techniques such as transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS). The location of optimal repetitive TMS (rTMS) stimulation to attenuate cue-elicited craving, however, remains elusive.
The primary aim of this investigation was to determine the spatial variability in peak cortical activity during cue-elicited craving across a large sample of individuals that performed a standardized drug cue-reactivity task tailored to their drug of dependence (cocaine, alcohol, nicotine). This was done in a cohort of non-treatment seeking individuals dependent on cocaine only, alcohol only, or nicotine only. A secondary aim was to calculate whether observed population variability could be captured by a single site of TMS simulation or if it requires within-individual functional mapping.
Method.
Participants.
For this investigation data was aggregated from four separate investigations of drug cue-reactivity performed at the Medical University of South Carolina (MUSC) from 2012–2017. In each of these studies non-treatment drug users (chronic cocaine users (n = 55), heavy alcohol users (n = 53), and current cigarette smokers (n = 48)) were recruited from the Charleston, SC metropolitan area using word-of-mouth advertising and digital and print media. The recruitment, consent, and initial functional MRI scanning session for all of these studies was consistent. To be eligible participants needed to be 21–60 years old and meet criteria for nicotine, alcohol, or cocaine dependence. Exclusionary criteria were related to medical history and MRI safety including known history of neurologic disease, currently meeting DSM-IV criteria for psychiatric disease (other than substance dependence), and metal implants above the waist or history of a gunshot or shrapnel in the skin. Specifically, after the initial phone contact all individuals were invited to a screening visit wherein they provided signed informed consent approved by the MUSC Institutional Review Board and completed a series of screening assessments which evaluated their medical health, psychiatric health, and drug use history. Basic demographic and drug use history of these three groups are presented in Table 1.
Following the screening visit, all participants were invited to a second visit wherein they would receive an MRI scan assessing their neural response to drug cues tailored to their stated drug of choice (cocaine, alcohol, or cigarette). All participants were asked to refrain from using cocaine or alcohol on the day of the MRI scanning session and smoking cigarettes 2 h before the scanning session. Urine drug screens were used to verify abstinence from cocaine. Exhaled carbon monoxide levels were measured with a Micro-Smokelyzer (Bedfont Scientific Ltd., Kent, UK) and exhaled alcohol was measured using Breathalyzer (BACTrack).
Drug/alcohol cue reactivity fMRI task.
The drug-cue reactivity task was based on prior work [,]. In the MRI environment participants viewed blocks of cocaine, alcohol, or smoking cues and neutral pictures (e.g. pencils, dishes) color matched for hue, brightness, and contrast. These task blocks were interleaved with control blocks (fixation cross, blurred images). The task was administered in the MRI scanner as a block design using E-Prime software (Psychology Software Tools, Inc.). The total task time was 12 mins and consisted of six 120-second epochs. Each epoch included alternating 24-second blocks of four task conditions: Drug, Neutral, Blur, and Rest. Respectively, these task conditions included images of cocaine- or alcohol-related stimuli customized for each group (e.g. crack pipe for cocaine users; liquor bottles for alcohol users); neutral stimuli (e.g. glass of water, cooking utensils, people eating dinner); blurred stimuli acting as visual controls by matching substance images in color and hue; and a fixation cross for alert rest periods. During each task block, 5 images were presented (4.8 s).
Image acquisition.
High-resolution T1-weighted anatomical images were acquired for each participant (3.0 T Siemens Trio, 3D SPGR, TR = 10 ms, TE = 3 ms, voxel dimensions 1.0 × 1.0 × 1.5 mm, 256 × 256 voxels, 124 slices). The head was positioned along the canthomeatal line. Foam padding was used to limit head motion. T2* weighted imaging data were acquired during the 12 min cue-reactivity task (TR = 2.2, TE = 35 ms, 64 × 64, 3 mm isotropic voxels).
Neuroimaging data analysis.
MRI data were preprocessed using SPM12 (Wellcome Department of Cognitive Neurology, London, UK) implemented in Matlab 7.14 (MathWorks, Inc., Natick, MA). MR Images were first converted from DICOM format to 4D NIfTI files and motion corrected (Realign: 6 parameter rigid-body realignment to first image in each timeseries using a least-squares approach). Normalization parameters, bias correction and anatomical tissue maps were determined simultaneously, using the Segment toolbox. Individual anatomical images were stripped of their skulls by masking the bias-corrected image with the combined tissue masks of gray matter, white matter, and CSF. The functional images derived from realignment were coregistered, through the mean image, to the skull-stripped anatomical image (Coregister: Estimate, using normalized mutual information). Coregistered images were then normalized (Normalize: Write) to MNI template space with the nonlinear warps derived from the Segment tool. Finally, functional images were masked (to remove the skull) and smoothed (8 mm FWHM Gaussian kernel) to facilitate subsequent analysis. Inspection of motion correction parameters revealed that all corrections were <2 mm.
Analyses were done on individual level and a group level. Overall effects were calculated using second-level, random-effects analyses of this contrast for all individuals, with cocaine, alcohol, and nicotine users each represented as a unique column in the design matrix. For each participant, first-level, fixed-effects comparisons were made to determine activation during drug/alcohol cue blocks relative to neutral blocks using the general linear model. Motion parameters (6 dimensions: x, y, z, yaw, pitch, roll) were included as covariates in the model. Voxel-wise correction for multiple comparisons was done via AFNI’s 3dClustSim with the autocorrelation module enabled (2017 version; https://afni.nimh.nih.gov/pub/dist/doc). Clusters with a p-value < 0.05 are reported (determined by Monte Carlo simulation; voxel-level threshold of p < 0.005 for at least 48 contiguous voxels). To investigate individual variability, the primary locus of activity in the during drug-related cues relative to neutral cues (“hot spot”) was isolated for each individual by locating the local maximum voxel (x, y, z, MNI coordinates) within the most significant cluster of activity (p < 0.05, corrected at the cluster level). The analysis was limited to cortical areas as one of the aims of this study was to identify potential frontal targets for current noninvasive brain stimulation methods such as TMS. The mask included the following bilateral regions of interest extracted from the standardized WFU_Pick atlas implemented in MATLAB (https://www.nitrc.org/projects/wfu_pickatlas): anterior cingulate cortex, middle frontal gyrus, medial frontal gyrus, inferior frontal gyrus, and superior frontal gyrus (2D dilation value: 3).
Spatial dispersion of the “hot spots”, were characterized via k-means clustering (as implemented in MATLAB and cross-checked with R). K-means clustering as implemented in Matlab used the K + + algorithm, an iterative, data-partitioning algorithm that assigns the total number of observations (e.g. MNI coordinates for clusters significantly activated by drug-cues) to exactly one of ‘k’ clusters defined by centroids, where ‘k ‘ is chosen before the algorithm starts. The K + + algorithm is a two-phase process which uses batch and online updates to minimize the sum of point-to-centroid distances in k clusters. Specifically, following the initial random seeding of k-centroids, a distance is calculated from each point to each centroid and that point is classified as a member of a given centroid. This is reseated, and centroid locations are reassigned if a reassignment decreases the sum of the within-cluster sum of squared point-to-centroid distance. For the present study this procedure was repeated 1000 times with random seeding. This was done for the full complement of points (n = 261) as well as for a restricted data set limited to one cluster per individual (n = 103).
In this experiment we utilized k values of 2–10 to evaluate the possibility that there could be up to 10 unique clusters. The optimal solution was derived via the use of silhouette plots. For each cluster the centroid vales was recorded as well as the average and maximum distance of any given point to the center of the centroid. Posthoc tests were performed to determine whether the areas of peak activity for cocaine cue-reactivity, alcohol cue-reactivity, and smoking cue-reactivity were equally distributed among the centroids (Chi-square, IBM SPSS Statistics ver.19, p < 0.05). The distribution of gender was also investigated given prior study from our group which suggests males may have a more uniform distribution than females.
TMS distance methods.
The data from the individual level analysis (‘hotspots’) were used to determine the scalp locations (EEG 10-10 coordinates) that were closest to the greatest number of points significantly activated by drug cues. The Euclidean distances from each hotspot to EEG 10-10 system coordinates were calculated. We evaluated the percentage of hotspots that would be reached at several distances (2–5 cm) given that the penetration characteristics of rTMS are dependent on coil size. Analyses were done for the full complement of participants as well as subgroups defined by the individual’s drug of choice.
Code availability.
Computing programs and customized scripts used in this experiment are all available for free to the community by contacting the corresponding author.