Title.
Alterations in White Matter Microstructure and Connectivity in Young Adults with Alcohol Use Disorder.
Abstract.
Background.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) studies have shown differences in volume and structure in the brains of individuals with alcohol use disorder (AUD). Most research has focused on neuropathological effects of alcohol that appear after years of chronic alcohol misuse. However, few studies have investigated white matter (WM) microstructure and diffusion MRI-based (DWI) connectivity during early stages of AUD. Therefore, the goal of this work was to investigate WM integrity and structural connectivity in emerging adulthood AUD subjects using both conventional DWI metrics and a novel connectomics approach.
Methods.
Twenty-two AUD and eighteen controls (CON) underwent anatomical and diffusion MRI. Outcome measures were scalar diffusion metrics and structural network connectomes. Tract Based Spatial Statistics was used to investigate group differences in diffusion measures. Structural connectomes were used as input into a community structure procedure to obtain a co-classification index matrix (an indicator of community association strength) for each subject. Differences in co-classification and structural connectivity (indexed by streamline density) were assessed via the Network Based Statistics Toolbox.
Results.
AUD had higher FA values throughout the major WM tracts, but also had lower FA values in WM tracts in the cerebellum and right insula (pTFCE < 0.05). Mean diffusivity was generally lower in the AUD group (pTFCE < 0.05). AUD had lower co-classification of nodes between ventral attention and default mode networks, and higher co-classification between nodes of visual, default mode, and somatomotor networks. Additionally, AUD had higher fiber density between an adjacent pair of nodes within the default mode network.
Conclusion.
Our results indicate that emerging adulthood AUD subjects may have differential patterns of FA and distinct differences in structural connectomes compared to CON. These data suggest that such alterations in microstructure and structural connectivity may uniquely characterize early stages of AUD and/or a predisposition for development of AUD.
Introduction.
Alcohol use disorder (AUD) is the most common addictive disorder and is associated with significant morbidity, mortality, social, and economic burden. Despite decades of research, a complete understanding of the disease processes remains incomplete, which hinders the development of successful treatments for AUD. One strategy to aid in our knowledge is to study younger individuals with AUD in order to better characterize the brain during the earliest stages of the disorder. Additionally, AUD is a significant health problem in young adults. According to the 2016 National Survey on Drug Use and Health (NSDUH), 12% of individuals aged 21– 25 years old report heavy alcohol use (binge drinking on five or more days in the past month), yet only 5.6% of those 35 and older report heavy alcohol use (NSDUH, 2016). Furthermore, among college aged students (age 18–25), studies show that between 10 – 20% meet the criteria for an alcohol use disorder; however, in the general population, only around 5% meet the criteria for AUD (, NSDUH, 2016). These epidemiological reports demonstrate that AUD in young adults is already a significant problem. Although a growing body of literature exists on the effects of drinking (and risk for AUD) on adolescent (age 13–17) brains (also, see below), little is known about brain structure in young adults (~18–25 years old) with AUD. Late adolescence/emerging adulthood is a critical neurodevelopmental window that involves maturation of reward-related regions and cortical areas involved with executive function (for review see). As this age group enters a collegiate environment, the potential for greater exposure to alcohol increases. In turn, this increases the vulnerability for development of AUD and potential concomitant adverse consequences on brain development during this time period. Thus, there is a critical need to better understand the effects of AUD on the brain in younger individuals, as this may ultimately facilitate the ability to identify those at risk for sustained AUD. In turn, such knowledge could permit development of interventions to prevent extensive damage and/or persistence of AUD throughout adulthood.
Diffusion weighted imaging (DWI) is a neuroimaging technique that allows a non-invasive investigation of white matter (WM) microstructure. In preclinical studies, it is well known that alcohol leads to myelination injury. Similarly, DWI studies have demonstrated that AUD is associated with deleterious effects on WM microstructure in recently detoxified individuals who reported, on average, two decades of alcohol use. While widespread deficits in WM tracts have been observed, damage has most consistently been demonstrated in the corpus callosum, frontal forceps, internal and external capsules, fornix, superior cingulate and longitudinal fasciculi. However, data on the consequences of alcohol misuse on WM integrity in college-age individuals (18–24 years of age) are extremely limited and equivocal. At a 2-year follow-up, 20–21 year-old binge drinkers had no changes in DTI-based metrics over time, and were not different from controls. In addition, while lower FA has been reported in binge drinkers ~17 years of age, higher FA has been observed in individuals with AUD of similar age. Thus, additional work is needed to better understand the ramifications of hazardous drinking in college-age young adults.
Studies that employ DWI typically adopt a diffusion tensor model and quantify WM integrity utilizing fractional anisotropy (FA), which is a metric that represents the degree anisotropy of water diffusion. In the WM, lower FA values are indicative of less restriction in water movement, which suggests a disruption in the microstructural environment. In addition to FA, the full diffusion tensor shape can also be described with other scalar metrics such as mean, axial, and radial diffusivity (MD, AD, and RD, respectively).
Chronic alcohol misuse has been associated with a reduction in DWI-based measures of WM integrity, whereas, in adolescent populations, higher measurements of WM integrity are typically reported, which are thought to reflect a predisposition to development of alcohol use disorder. Few studies have sought to investigate the effects of alcohol on WM microstructure in emerging adulthood (ages 18–24), when persistent hazardous drinking behaviors are typically established. Increased understanding of the neurobiological consequences of AUD in this critical development period could bridge the gap between findings from adolescent and adult AUD research. Additionally, most DWI studies have been conducted in detoxified/abstinent AUD subjects; therefore, the present study makes a further contribution to the limited body of knowledge on WM microstructural differences in currently drinking, non-treatment seeking AUD subjects.
While DWI is in widespread use in research and clinical examinations of WM microstructural defects, traditional metrics (e.g., FA) may not be sensitive enough to detect structural differences in early AUD. However, network science-based connectomics methodology may offer a novel insight into microstructural deficits in early AUD. These methods are applied to data obtained from DWI tractography-modeled brain networks of nodes (regions) and edges (connections). One such network method is modularity, which represents the degree of segregation of a network into groups of interconnected nodes called communities. Putative differences in community structure between emerging adult AUD subjects and healthy individuals may represent a predisposition or an early consequence of AUD that has yet to be investigated.
The purpose of the present study was to investigate the WM integrity in young adults with or without AUD using both traditional metrics and a novel community detection approach. We hypothesized that, similar to older cohorts, younger AUD subjects would display significant differences in WM microstructure and altered connectivity due to the development of and/or consequences of AUD.
Materials and Methods.
Subjects.
All study procedures were approved by the Institutional Review Board at Indiana University. Informed consent was obtained from all subjects prior to study. Twenty-two subjects with alcohol use disorder (AUD) and eighteen healthy controls (CON) were recruited from the community as part of a larger study as described in. To qualify, participants had to be 18 – 30 years old, have at least 6th grade level of English comprehension, had consumed alcohol previously, and had no history of psychiatric illness or head trauma. AUD subjects had a current lifetime diagnosis of AUD. Four AUD participants also had a past lifetime diagnosis of a Substance Use Disorder other than alcohol; one AUD participant met criteria for marijuana use disorder. Severity of lifetime alcohol problems was measured using the Semi-Structured Assessment for the Genetics of Alcoholism (SSAGA), as the total count of all positive responses to all SSAGA questions in the Alcohol Diagnosis section. The score range across all subjects was 0–99. Recent alcohol consumption was quantified as the total number of self-reported drinks in the last 2 weeks. Prior to study day, subjects were asked to abstain from alcohol for 12 hours. A breath alcohol test confirmed sobriety on scan day (Alco-Sensor IV, Intoximeters, St. Louis, MO).
Imaging.
Data were acquired on a Siemens 3T Trio-Tim (Siemens, Erlangen, Germany). Diffusion weighted data were collected with a single-shell (b=1000 s/mm2) 2D acquisition; 64 diffusion directions and 8 b = 0 volumes; A-P phase encoding; 128×128 matrix; 72 slices; 2 × 2 × 2 mm3 voxels, iPAT factor = 2. A T1-weighted 3D anatomic sequence was also acquired (Field of view = 192×168 matrix, 160 sagittal slices, and 1.3 × 1.3 × 1.3 mm3 voxels).
Image processing.
An in-house Matlab-based pipeline that utilizes FSL (Version 5.0.9) and Camino was applied for image processing. Each subjects’ anatomic T1-weighted image was denoised, skull stripped (FSL bet), and segmented according to tissue-type (FSL FAST). Diffusion weighted data were first denoised with local principal component analysis filter, then the eight b0 volumes were registered to the first volume and averaged. The data were then corrected for motion, eddy currents, and registered to each subject’s anatomic space. This image processing procedure has been previously published in detail elsewhere. At each voxel, tensor estimation was done with multi-tensor fitting in Camino in which voxels were classified as isotropic, anisotropic Gaussian (single tensor), or nonGaussian (multi-tensor). Scalar metrics of diffusion including FA, MD, AD, and RD were derived from tensor data. Streamline tractography was carried out in Camino with Fiber Assignment by Continuous Tracking algorithm in each subject’s anatomic space. Relevant tractography parameters were: 1 seed per voxel at the interface of gray matter (GM) and WM (obtained from the overlap of dilated GM and WM tissue masks), with an additional seed placed if a streamline encountered a multi-tensor voxel, whereupon each streamline followed one of the tensor directions; step size 1 voxel; maximum turning angle of 45 degrees over 5 steps. Streamlines terminated upon reaching another seed voxel at the GM/WM interface. After tracking, a length filter was applied to discard very short (<8mm) or extremely long (>180mm) streamlines. Throughout the processing, data were visually inspected for proper alignment and quality.
Tract-Based Spatial Statistics (TBSS).
FA maps for each subject were generated in subjects’ anatomical space and analyzed via Tract-Based Spatial Statistics (TBSS). These data were nonlinearly registered onto the FMRIB58 template FA image (FSL’s FNIRT). The mean FA volume was created and thinned to generate a skeleton representation of core WM tracts. Each subject’s FA data were then projected onto the skeleton and used for subsequent analysis.
Structural Network Assembly.
For each subject, we generated a structural connectivity network matrix, where the cortical nodes were based on a previously published brain parcellation. For the subcortical nodes, we implemented regions defined by for the striatum and by for the thalamus. The thalamic regions were further consolidated from 7 to 4 regions (pre-motor, primary motor, and sensory input regions were combined, and occipital and temporal regions were combined) per hemisphere to ensure sufficiently sized regions for tractography analysis. For all region pairs, number of streamlines and average seed surface area were extracted from the whole-brain tractogram with the Camino conmat function. The number of streamlines matrix was then thresholded to zero any values ≤ 2 to minimize the influence of false positive connections. Finally, network edges were quantified as fiber density (number of streamlines / average seed surface of connected regions) between any pair of connected regions. Global metrics of network connectivity were calculated from the fiber density matrices with the Brain Connectivity Toolbox.
Community Structure (From Hierarchical Consensus Clustering).
For each subject’s structural connectivity network matrix (see above), a set of 1000 modularity partitions was generated with methodology that is part of a novel Multiresolution Consensus Clustering procedure developed by. This method samples the full resolution range of resolution of modularity across a given number of partitions. A co-classification (CA) matrix was then generated, where edge weights are the frequency with which two nodes belong to the same module across the identified ensemble of partitions.
Statistical Analyses.
Group subject demographics were assessed with independent-samples t-statistic or chi-squared tests, and results at p < 0.05 were considered statistically significant. Group differences in FA images from TBSS were interrogated with permutation testing in FSL’s randomise. Contrasts were generated after 10,000 permutations with Threshold-Free Cluster Enhancement (TFCE) for multiple comparisons correction across all skeleton voxels. Significant clusters from all contrasts were ordered by size and thresholded at the largest 1% (corresponding to > 500 voxels in size) of clusters across all comparisons (8 contrasts with a total of 1469 clusters that range 1 to 12892 voxels in size). FSL’s cluster tool was used to extract mean cluster FA. Comparisons of continuous measures of subject characteristics and global metrics of network connectivity were conducted with independent samples t-tests. Chi-squared tests were used to test for differences in categorical variables. The Network Based Statistics (NBS) Toolbox was used to compare the fiber density and CA network matrices between groups. False Discovery Rate (FDR) after 5,000 permutations was used to control for multiple comparisons.