Title.
Apparent Effects of Opioid Use on Neural Responses to Reward in Chronic Pain.
Abstract.
Neural responses to incentives are altered in chronic pain and by opioid use. To understand how opioid use modulates the neural response to reward/value in chronic pain, we compared brain functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) responses to a monetary incentive delay (MID) task in patients with fibromyalgia taking opioids (N = 17), patients with fibromyalgia not taking opioids (N = 17), and healthy controls (N = 15). Both groups of patients with fibromyalgia taking and not taking opioids had similar levels of pain, psychological measures, and clinical symptoms. Neural responses in the nucleus accumbens to anticipated reward and non-loss outcomes did not differ from healthy controls in either fibromyalgia group. However, neural responses in the medial prefrontal cortex differed, such that patients with fibromyalgia not taking opioids demonstrated significantly altered responses to anticipated rewards and non-loss outcomes compared to healthy controls, but patients with fibromyalgia taking opioids did not. Despite limitations including the use of additional non-opioid medications by fibromyalgia patients taking opioids, these preliminary findings suggest relatively “normalized” neural responses to monetary incentives in chronic pain patients who take opioids versus those who do not.
Introduction.
Exogenous opioids are potent analgesics that exert their effects at the level of the spinal cord and by involving supraspinal sites via descending circuits (for review). However, evidence suggests that long-term opioid use may not clinically improve the condition of individuals with chronic pain. Current guidelines do not recommend opioids for the treatment of fibromyalgia, a condition of widespread chronic pain, due to the overlap between side effects of opioids (e.g., negative impacts on mood, sleep, cognition) and many co-occurring symptoms of fibromyalgia (e.g., impaired cognition, anxiety, depression, fatigue, poor sleep quality) as well as the potential for addictive behaviors when taking opioids. Other than a small number of studies investigating efficacy of tramadol, there are no randomized controlled trials of pure mu-opioid agonists on fibromyalgia. However, despite opioid treatment not proving superior to non-opioid treatment for chronic pain, some individuals with chronic pain report benefitting over 12 months when taking opioids, similar to their non-opioid taking counterparts. Further, recent data from opioid taper clinical trials indicate that approximately 25% of patients with chronic pain taking opioids choose not to participate in opioid tapering (and almost another 25% withdraw), suggesting that these individuals may believe they are benefiting from opioids despite myriad known side-effects. This discrepancy between clinical observations and patients’ beliefs is not trivial given significant and increasing concerns regarding the risks of opioid use, including overdose and addiction. Prescription of opioids for the treatment of fibromyalgia, in particular, remains controversial and poorly informed.
While the use of long-term opioid medications might not be beneficial for chronic pain per se (i.e., in terms of not improving physical function and not reducing pain interference for example), it is possible that opioid medications could be benefiting brain reward processing and associated reward behavior in patients with chronic pain. Endogenous opioids are heavily involved in neural circuits implicated in reward processing. Neural circuits implicated in reward processing include a network of cortical and subcortical regions including the nucleus accumbens (NAcc) within the ventral striatum, medial prefrontal cortex (MPFC), ventral tegmental area (VTA), amygdala, insular cortex, thalamus, and anterior cingulate cortex (ACC). Exogenous opioids can modulate reward-related behavior in animals (i.e., enhance drug reinforcement/place preference), and endogenous opioids partially mediate stress-induced analgesia in humans. To date, a fair amount of published data exists on reward processing and effects of opioids on brain reward circuits in animal models of chronic pain. In sharp contrast, limited data currently exist on how use of exogenous opioids influence reward processing in humans with chronic pain. It has been shown that individuals taking opioids (without chronic pain) have reduced functional connectivity (correlated activity) between the NAcc and other reward-related regions including the medial inferior orbitofrontal cortex. Additionally, in individuals with chronic low back pain, rapid structural changes occur in brain regions involved in pain and reward processing (including the amygdala and orbitofrontal cortex) after only one month of opioid therapy.
The study of reward and punishment is highly relevant for chronic pain. One of the most common features of someone in chronic pain, including fibromyalgia, is the development of fear-avoidance to movement, or kinesophobia. This phenomenon is a great barrier to treating patients and helping improve their physical function and quality of life. Physical activity leads to pain (a punishment), which in turn progressively diminishes physical activity frequency, while avoidance of movement (and pain) is rewarding in the short-term which reinforces this maladaptive cycle. Thus, it is important to understand the mediators, moderators, and mechanisms of reward and punishment to develop and optimize safe and effective treatments to reduce or break this cycle. Chronic pain can alter neural function implicated in incentive processing, for example via reduced neurotransmission in motivational circuits in rodent models of chronic pain and as evidenced by reduced NAcc response to painful stimulus offset in chronic pain patients. Further, individuals with chronic pain may have reduced brain opioid and dopamine function. Moreover, we have shown in a previous publication that individuals with fibromyalgia have reduced arousal to monetary incentive cues, reduced responses in the MPFC during reward anticipation, and increased MPFC response to non-loss outcomes (or avoidance of punishment).
Neural responses to rewards can be influenced by the experience of chronic pain, use of exogenous opioids, and potential for addictive behavior associated with opioid use - and all of these factors likely interact in complex ways. However, very limited data currently exist on how the use of exogenous opioids influences reward processing in humans with chronic pain.
To begin characterizing effects of opioid use on reward behavior and brain reward processing in patients with chronic pain, we studied a cohort of individuals with fibromyalgia taking opioids using a well-validated monetary incentive delay (MID) task. The MID task manipulates potential monetary incentives involving gains (e.g., +$5 versus $0) and losses (e.g., −$5 versus $0) and yields measures of brain activity in response to both anticipation and outcome phases of these experiences across repeated trials. In healthy individuals participating in the MID task, reward anticipation typically elicits robust increases in bilateral NAcc activity, which correlates with ratings of positive aroused affect. This response is often accompanied by increased activity in the insular cortex (associated with risk), as well as other regions including the caudate and thalamus. Conversely, reward outcomes typically elicit increased activity within regions of the MPFC, along with the caudate, amygdala and putamen, indicating that anticipation and outcome represent distinct components of reward processing. In our previous publication, fibromyalgia patients not taking opioids show normal NAcc reward anticipatory activity, but reduced MPFC reward anticipatory activity, and increased MPFC response to non-loss outcomes (non-punishment), as compared with healthy controls. In the present study, we compared a new cohort of fibromyalgia patients taking opioids to the previously published data set. While the effects of long-term opioid use on reward processing in chronic pain patients are generally unknown, we developed our current predictions based on these prior results. We specifically predicted that NAcc and MPFC responses to anticipated rewards and non-loss outcomes might be similarly altered in individuals with fibromyalgia taking opioids, as compared with healthy controls, and that this pattern would occur to a greater extent than in patients with fibromyalgia not taking opioids.
Methods.
Participants.
Thirty-seven females with fibromyalgia and 17 healthy females participated in the study. All fibromyalgia participants met the following inclusion criteria: American College of Rheumatology (ACR) 2011 criteria for fibromyalgia [(1) widespread pain index (WPI) score ≥ 7 + symptom severity (SS) score ≥ 5, or WPI score 3–6 + SS score ≥ 9, (2) similar level of symptoms present for at least 3 months, (3) no disorder to otherwise explain the pain], pain in 4 body quadrants, previous month average pain score of at least 2 (0–10 verbal scale), not pregnant or nursing, no MRI contraindications (e.g., claustrophobia, metal in body), and no uncontrolled depression or anxiety. All fibromyalgia participants were allowed to continue their normal use of medications during the study. To be included in the non-opioid fibromyalgia group, individuals were not to be taking opioids as part of their treatment, not to have taken any opioids during the 90 days prior to study participation, and never to have taken opioids for a period greater than 30 days. To be included in the opioid fibromyalgia group, individuals were required to be have been taking opioid medications as part of their treatment for at least 3 months and at the time of study participation. Control participants were required to not have chronic pain, not be pregnant or nursing, have no MRI contraindications, and have no depression or anxiety.
Study procedures.
All procedures were approved by the Stanford University Institutional Review Board, were carried out in accordance with the approved protocols, and were conducted at the Stanford University Richard M. Lucas Center for Imaging. All participants signed written and informed consent acknowledging their willingness to participate in the study, understanding of all study procedures, and understanding that they were free to withdraw their study participation at any time. Data from the control and non-opioid fibromyalgia groups were analyzed previously and included in another publication.
Prior to the scan session, study participants received instruction and practiced the MID task (for approximately 5 minutes) and use of arousal and valence rating scales. If necessary, the MID task practice was repeated until the participant understood the task and performed the task successfully. Participants underwent training on the rating scales for arousal and valence with written instructions presented on a laptop and explained to participants by trained personnel.
Questionnaires were administered to all subjects to determine clinical and psychological measures among the two fibromyalgia groups and control group. Questionnaires measured depression, anxiety, behavioral inhibition/approach, mood, positive and negative affect, pain distribution, pain intensity, pain interference, pain distribution, and fatigue (see Table 2 and Supplementary Methods for a list and references for questionnaires included in the analysis).
Structural MRI and fMRI data were acquired from all participants using a 3T General Electric scanner using an 8-channel head coil (GE Systems, Chicago, Illinois). The scan session consisted of a localizer scan, asset calibration scans, 2 MID task fMRI scans, and a T1 anatomical scan. The 2 MID fMRI task scans were acquired sequentially (no break in between) and with the following parameters: Gradient Echo Pulse Sequence with spiral in-out acquisition, flip angle of 76°, echo time (TE) of 30 seconds, repetition time (TR) of 2 seconds, sequential descending slice order, 32 oblique slices, slice thickness 4 mm, gap 0.5 mm, pixel size 3.43 mm. The spiral in-out scan sequence was used because it reduces orbitofrontal signal drop-out and improves acquisition of the medial prefrontal cortex and orbitofrontal cortex. The MID 1 fMRI scan included 266 volumes and the MID 2 fMRI scan included 302 volumes, excluding 12 s lead-in and 8 s lead-out. The T1 anatomical scan was acquired using 3D FSPGR (fast spoiled gradient-echo) IRprep BRAVO for registration of functional images and included whole brain, brainstem and cerebellum coverage; slice thickness 1 mm; frequency field of view (FOV) 22 mm, anterior/posterior frequency direction, 2 number of excitations (NEX), 11° flip angle, 6.8 TR, 2.6 TE, 256 frequency, 256 phase, 50.00 bandwidth.
Monetary Incentive Delay (MID) fMRI Task.
We ran the MID task in MATLAB (MATLAB R2012b, MathWorks, Natick, MA), using Psychophysics Toolbox for presentation of visual stimuli (Psychtoolbox-3) via a screen placed above the participant in the scanner. Participant responses to the task were collected using a custom designed button box. A total of 90 trials were administered during the two MID task scans as performed previously. Cues indicated the amount of money to be potentially gained (+$5.00, +$1.00, +$0.00) or lost (−$5.00, −$1.00, −$0.00) during each trial. After a 2 s delay (fixation cross) a target (triangle) was presented. Participants needed to initiate a response (button press) to either win (positive cues) or avoid losing (negative cues) the amount shown. Successful responses (i.e., occurring prior to target duration offset) generated a “hit” and unsuccessful responses generated a “miss”. Outcomes for each trial were presented as the amount gained (e.g., +$5.00), not gained (+$0.00), not lost (−$0.00), or lost (e.g., −$5.00). Target durations varied: initial target durations were set at the beginning of the scan (typically 250 ms) and programmatically adjusted throughout the task to target “hit” rate of approximately 66% across trials.
Arousal (low-medium-high) and valence (negative-neutral-positive) ratings were collected after the MID task fMRI scans using 7-point Likert scales. Participants were sent Amazon electronic gift cards for the combined total of gains and losses during the task after completion of the scan.
fMRI Data preprocessing.
Neuroimaging data were preprocessed using AFNI software (Analysis of Functional Neuroimages) [precompiled binary macosx_10.7_Intel_64: Jun 10 2016 (Version AFNI_16.1.21)] using custom scripts, and as performed previously. First, 6 read-in and 9 read-out volumes were excluded from the scan data, the 2 MID fMRI scans were then concatenated into one series of images. Next, the functional images were slice time corrected, transformed from oblique to axial slice orientation, and aligned with the structural images. Motion correction was performed with 6 degrees of movement [translation (x, y, z), rotation (roll, pitch, yaw)]. The functional images were spatially smoothed using a 4 mm (full-width half-maximum, FWHM) Gaussian kernel. Intensity normalization was applied by calculating the percent signal change per voxel and division by the average. We applied a 0.011 Hz high-pass filter to the functional data. Structural images were warped to Talairach space and functional images were warped to the Talairach warped structural images. A white matter (WM) and a cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) mask were created for each subject’s functional image based on signal intensity in seed loci in WM and CSF regions, respectively.
fMRI Task contrasts.
As used previously four separate orthogonal regressors contrasted responses to gain and loss during anticipation and outcome: gain versus no-gain anticipation (GVNant), loss versus no-loss anticipation (LVNant), gain versus no-gain outcome (GVNout), and no-loss versus loss outcome (NVLout). Contrasts compared gain and loss conditions to neutral (i.e., +/−$0) conditions, rather than to a no-stimulus baseline condition, in order to (1) focus on differences in reward/value processes in the brain and (2) to exclude general performance-related brain activity from the evaluated signal. Specifically, the contrasts included:
GVNant: anticipation during potential gain (+$5 cue) trials versus anticipation during potential no-gain (+/−$0 cue) trials; LVNant: anticipation during potential loss (−$5 cue) trials versus anticipation during potential no-loss (+/−$0 cue) trials; GVNout: hit (+$5 outcome) versus miss (+$0 outcome) during the outcome period for potential gain (+$5 cue) trials; NVLout: hit (−$0 outcome) versus miss (−$5 outcome) during the outcome period for potential loss (−$5 cue) trials.
The regressors of interest were convolved with a single gamma function approximating the hemodynamic response, with approximately a 6 second delay. We applied conservative motion censoring to the regressors so that any volume showing motion greater than 0.5 mm (and preceding volume) were excluded. Resulting activation maps “activity” for each participant represented blood oxygenation level dependent (BOLD) signal (a correlate of blood oxygenation levels which are a correlate of neural activity in fMRI) response corresponding to the regressor for each contrast separately. These individual activation maps were tested for group differences within a priori ROIs and post-hoc whole brain group comparisons. To maximize our chances of identifying significant group effects and consistent with previously published methods, trials with +$1 cues were excluded from the fMRI contrasts because the strength of BOLD signal response for these trials was determined to be much lower than trials with +$5 cues (Supplementary Fig. S5).
Region of Interest fMRI analyses.
Region of interest (ROI) analyses focused on the NAcc and MPFC. We predicted that, in comparison to both control and non-opioid fibromyalgia, the opioid fibromyalgia group would show: 1) decreased NAcc activity during gain anticipation (GVNant) and no-loss outcome (NVLout), 2) decreased MPFC activity during gain anticipation (GVNant), and 3) increased MPFC activity during no-loss outcome (NVLout). We created the bilateral NAcc ROI by combining the left and right accumbens regions from the Desai Atlas (AFNI) and resampling to functional image resolution (52 voxels; voxel size = 2.9 mm × 2.9 mm × 2.9 mm). We created the bilateral MPFC ROI by drawing two conjoined 4 mm radius spheres (+/−4, 50, −3) within Brodmann Area 10 corresponding the frontal pole and resampling to functional image resolution (42 voxels). Additional information regarding the precise selection of the MPFC ROI can be found in the Supplementary Methods.
We extracted fMRI values from these ROIs and performed group statistical comparisons using analysis of variance (ANOVA) and post-hoc t-tests in SPSS (IBM SPSS Statistics for Macintosh, Version 22.0. Armonk, NY). Additional correlation analyses were performed between the ROI data and behavioral and clinical measures using SPSS.
Clinical and psychological data analysis.
Questionnaire data were quantified for each questionnaire separately and then assessed for group differences using ANOVA (SPSS). Post-hoc between group t-tests were then used to determine differences between individual groups (Tukey, SPSS). (See Table 2 and Supplementary Methods for list and descriptions of questionnaires).
Behavioral analysis.
We assessed performance and behavioral responses to the MID task by analyzing accuracy (percent hit rate), reaction times, and post-task ratings of arousal and valence to monetary cues. Additionally, measures of positive arousal and negative arousal were calculated from mean-deviated ratings of arousal and valence within subjects as done previously. Each of these measures were assessed separately for differences across the 3 groups using a two-way ANOVA with factors of trial (here, “trial” simply refers to trials with different cues: +$0, +$1, +$5, −$0, −$1, −$5), group (HC, FMN, FMO), and trial by group interaction). Post-hoc one-way ANOVA tests were also used to determine group effects for each trial/cue separately (MATLAB, R2017a).
MID Task fMRI analysis.
Averaged beta values (parameter estimates) were extracted for each ROI from each participant for each contrast combination using custom scripts (MATLAB, AFNI). The extracted beta values were compared among groups using ANOVA (SPSS). We set the significance threshold to p < 0.0125 (initial p < 0.05 threshold Bonferroni corrected for 4 predetermined ROI x contrast comparisons: NAcc GVNant, NAcc NVLout, MPFC GVNant, MPFC NVLout). Additionally, raw time course data were plotted by extracting each participant’s fMRI data, sorting by trial type, and removing volumes with signal exceeding >4 standard deviations from mean activity.
fMRI Correlation analysis.
Correlations between fMRI beta values (NAcc GVNant, NAcc NVLout, MPFC GVNant, and MPFC NVLout) and questionnaire variables were tested across the two fibromyalgia groups (2-tailed, bivariate, Pearson correlation, SPSS) (see Supplementary Methods for list of included questionnaires). Correlations between ROI fMRI beta values and questionnaire variables were corrected for multiple comparisons based on the inclusion of 7 independent (not correlated) measures (Supplementary Methods). Additional analyses were conducted to rule out potential influences of motion on the results and to confirm ROI findings with whole brain analyses (Supplementary Methods).