Title.
Visuospatial task-related prefrontal activity is correlated with negative symptoms in schizophrenia.
Abstract.
Control of attention is thought to be specifically impaired in schizophrenia due to abnormal function in the prefrontal cortex (PFC). The PFC plays a critical role in the identification of relevant stimuli and the development of appropriate biases for the identified signals, including selection of an appropriate attentional ‘zoom’. We examined how demands associated with changes in attentional requirements in a Sustained Attention Task (SAT) may contribute to differences in functional involvement of the PFC and relation to clinical status. A group of 24 individuals with schizophrenia and 16 healthy controls (N = 40) performed the SAT and a visuospatial condition (vSAT) while activity in the bilateral anterior PFC was monitored using functional Near Infrared Spectroscopy (fNIRS). The results confirm that the right frontopolar region plays a role in control of attention for both patients and healthy controls. However, patients with schizophrenia exhibited a general attentional deficit and inefficient right-medial PFC activation. Additionally, we observed a strong regional association between left Middle Frontal Gyrus (MFG) activity during the vSAT task and the PANSS score driven by the negative symptom subscale. The presence of aberrant activation differences within the left-MFG region may describe a dysregulation of attentional networks linked to the clinical expression of negative and general symptoms.
Introduction.
Schizophrenia is a debilitating brain disorder characterized by positive, negative, and cognitive symptoms that affects approximately 1% of the global population. Attention deficits are among the key cognitive impairments associated with the illness and are a driving factor in quality of life and other functional outcomes. These symptoms typically predate psychosis and may act as a stable indicator of schizophrenia vulnerability but are largely unresponsive to pharmaceutical intervention with traditional or atypical neuroleptics. Without any appropriate avenue for remediation, attention impairment represents a fundamental cognitive symptom that is unaddressed by currently available clinical therapies. Illuminating the interactions between neural dynamics and attentional deficits may offer insight into neuro-individualized approaches to therapy.
Neuroimaging studies investigating the impairment of attention have found that behavioral deficits in schizophrenia are observed in conjunction with abnormal activation patterns within cortical regions strongly associated with attention such as the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (dlPFC), anterior prefrontal cortex (aPFC), anterior cingulate cortex (Acc), the insula, and other subcortical regions. In particular, dysfunction in the prefrontal cortex (PFC) is commonly observed as diminished activation, termed “hypofrontality”. However, both insufficient activation (decreased) and excessive activation (increased) in the PFC have been reported in patients, suggesting that rather than an explicit failure of function, irregular involvement of the PFC may reflect dysregulation in the processes of attention itself. Evidence from cued target tasks and saccadic responses indicate that the bottom-up maintenance of processes is relatively intact within schizophrenia, while in the presence of unpredictable cues and stimuli, the top-down processes are impaired. As a result, it has been proposed that people with schizophrenia may be particularly impaired during the “Control of Attention”, a top-down process through which information is restricted to relevant stimuli and appropriate attentional biases are developed including selection of an appropriate attentional ‘zoom’. Attentional biases towards task-relevant information are theorized to occur through the coordination of top-down and bottom-up mechanisms according to the biased competition model of selective attention. Researchers have sought to tease out the differences between these affected processes in order to quantify and evaluate the control of attention as a candidate marker for drug development.
Attention can be conceived as a limited cognitive resource which must be allocated appropriately in order to operate efficiently. ‘Control of Attention’ guides this allocation as described in part by the “Spotlight” or “Zoom Lens” theory of attention, which postulates that attention operates on a continuum between two stages. In the first stage, attention is fairly evenly distributed over the central field of a view to allow for parallel processing of an area. Whereas in the second stage, attention becomes focused on a specific area, leading to improved focal awareness at the expense of more distributed stimuli. Thus, there exists a tradeoff between processing efficiency and the size of the area being attended according to the level of ‘zoom’ that is engaged during a task. In schizophrenia, an inefficient ability to define or maintain appropriate attentional distribution may lead to a state of “hyperfocusing” which may reduce the visual span or saccadic length, and even contribute to failures in spatial working memory.
A recent Arterial Spin Labeling (ASL) imaging study using the Sustained Attention Task (SAT) identified a role for the right-PFC (BA 9/10) in healthy subjects when task difficulty was modulated by the presence of a distractor and it was later proposed that dysfunction in this region may be the cause of observed behavioral deficits in patients with schizophrenia. The right-PFC region has previously been ascribed a substantial role in initiation and maintenance of attentional processes as well as attentional dysfunction associated with fatigue and distraction. In schizophrenia, studies of attentional processes have noted the specific involvement of the right-PFC as an important regional hub and observed failures in attention have been as ascribed to a “frontal inefficiency” stemming from diminished connectivity between the executive network guided by the dlPFC and a salience network driven by the anterior insula. Functional studies have also identified this region as an area of interest; whether due to dysfunctional changes in lateralization of activity, failure to modulate with attention demands, or even as an area which is increasingly engaged following cognitive remediation.
We hypothesized that sensitivity to differences between broader attentional distribution and focused attention, as measured by contrasting a visuospatial SAT with the standard SAT, could create a candidate assessment for attentional control deficits in schizophrenia. Furthermore, we hypothesized that activity in the right-PFC would reflect the sensitivity of attentional processes to increased visuospatial demands, and that this sensitivity would be dysregulated in schizophrenia in a way which may provide clinically useful information. To test these hypotheses we sought to monitor task-evoked activities with functional Near Infrared Spectroscopy (fNIRS), a non-invasive neuroimaging technique which measures relative changes in cortical hemoglobin concentrations associated with cognitive activity. We used linear mixed effects (LME) models to evaluate the relationship between prefrontal activation, cognitive function, and clinical measures.
Methods.
Demographic information.
Participates in this study consisted of 16 healthy controls (10 female) recruited from the local community and 24 patients (16 female) diagnosed with schizophrenia who were recruited from the Shanghai Mental Health Center in Shanghai, China. Participants were all native Chinese over 18 years of age who voluntarily gave informed and written consent to participate in the study. The protocol in this study was reviewed, approved, and carried out according to the guidelines of the IRB of the Shanghai Mental Health. No significant differences were found between group age, education, or gender. All subjects participated in the HAM-D 24 Depression Scales and HAM-A Anxiety Scales. Patients were assessed according to the PANSS and its subscales. Patients scored significantly higher than controls on HAM Depression (p = 0.001) and Anxiety scores (p < 0.01) respectively. Demographic information is presented in Table 1. Detailed antipsychotic medication at time of testing for participants is listed in Supplementary Table A2.
Experimental procedure.
The SAT was constructed using a custom OpenGL program based on the methodology detailed in Demeter et al.. Participants were asked to monitor a silver screen (Lum 170) for a signal consisting of the appearance of a small gray square (Lum 107) in the center of the screen for varying durations of 20, 30 or 50 ms (corresponding to 1, 2, and 3 frames at a typical refresh rate of 60 Hz). Monitoring times before signal/non-signal presentation were varied pseudo randomly at a 1, 2, or 3 s inter-trial interval, and signal frequency was roughly 50% (Fig. 1). 100 ms following the appearance or non-appearance of the signal, the subject was informed by an audio cue and asked to denote whether the event was a signal or non-signal using the left and right mouse click respectively. The subject then was given 1500 ms to classify the event. Correct classifications were immediately given an audio feedback, while incorrect trials receive no feedback. Each task block was preceded by a 30 second resting period and lasted for approximately 120 seconds with approximately 42 stimulus trials in each task block. Following the end of each block, a cumulative performance metric is displayed to the subject. Each subject performed a total of 4 blocks, with two repetitions for each task type (vSAT & SAT).
A modification to the SAT, detailed here as vSAT, was used to introduce broadened attentional focus through the introduction of a visuospatial component. The task in vSAT is similar to the VSL-SAT task described by Demeter et al. with two modifications intended to increase task difficulty by requiring additional attentional resources. Contrast between the silver background and the signal was reduced by using a lighter gray block (Lum 155) to reduce the prominence of the signal. Additionally, signal location was pseudo randomly presented at one of 5 separate locations on the screen (Center, Top-Left, Top-Right, Bottom-Right, and Bottom-Left). An illustration describing the protocol is presented in Fig. 1.
Task performance was assessed using the SAT score, calculated using the methodology defined by Demeter et al.. This metric, which had been previously identified as the “Vigilance Index”, was identified as being comparable to other signal-detection measurements, namely d-prime, and uninfluenced by errors of omission. SAT score is defined aswhere Hits mean probability of correct signal/non-signal classification and False Alarms denote probability of incorrect signal/non-signal classification. SAT score ranges from −1 to + 1, with +1 indicating correct classification of all signal/non-signal events and −1 indicating that all responses were false alarms.
Additionally, we calculated the Score Difference as a measure of performance changes associated with Task Type manipulation. Score Difference (ScoreDiffvSAT) was calculated as the difference between Score on the vSAT task and the subject’s mean SAT score. Larger values of ScoreDiffvSAT are undesirable and would indicate large performance decreases associated with task type variation and increased sensitivity to attentional demand manipulation.
fNIRS data acquisition and processing.
Neuroimaging data was collected for 16 channels at 2 Hz from the anterior PFC (BA 10/46) using the fNIR1100 imager (fNIR Devices, Potomac, MD, USA) using COBI Studio as described in detail at Ayaz et al.. The fNIRS sensor was symmetrically centered and in line with Fp1 and Fp2 of the international 10–20 system on the subject’s forehead. The light intensity and detector gain were adjusted during setup to obtain sufficiently high but unsaturated intensity signals according to subject and environmental conditions. Channels were visually inspected for signal validity and the signal quality of individual task blocks was assessed and automatically rejected using the criteria adapted from Takizawa et al.. Surviving blocks were screened for motion artifacts using the SMAR algorithm, and a bandpass filter (0.008–0.25 Hz) was used to reduce high frequency noise associated with respiratory or cardiac function and remove signal drift. Physiological parameters are calculated using the modified Beer-Lambert Law using the 5 seconds before task initiation as a baseline period. Extracted measures are reported as the fNIRS biomarkers of [HbO], [HbR], and an estimate of relative change in Oxygen availability [Oxy] (calculated as the difference between [HbO] and [HbR]). The mean change from the pre-task baseline in fNIRS biomarkers ([HbO], [HbR], and [Oxy]) was assessed as the outcome of interest for statistical tests. Parametric plots for visualization purposes were registered to a virtual brain according to the methodology described in Ayaz et al.. Estimated underlying gyri and Brodmann’s areas for Optodes 1–16 are described in the Supplementary Materials of Liu et al..
Statistical analysis.
Data analysis was conducted using R (ver. 3.2.2) and SPSS (ver. 23.0.0, SPSS Inc.). Descriptive demographic and clinical statistics are presented as mean ± standard deviation or as a percentage of cases. An alpha level of α = 0.05 was used as the significance criteria for each test. Differences between clinical scores and demographic metrics were tested using the Welch’s t-test except for gender distribution which was assessed using the Chi-square test. Correlations for continuous variables are reported using Spearman’s rank correlation coefficients for identified groups as two-tailed test. Correlational analysis for biomarkers was controlled for Family-wise error rate using a channel-wise false discovery rate (FDR). Comparisons between behavioral results and published results presented in the appendix were made using unpaired t-tests.
Linear mixed-effects (LME) models were constructed to estimate the effects of task types across subject group as well as clinical covariates on observed behavioral metrics and fNIRS biomarkers. LME models offer significant advantages over repeated measures ANOVA in neuroimaging applications as they do not require equal numbers of observations and allow the models to be fit to individual participants. Models were analyzed using the maximum likelihood (ML) function and degrees if freedom were approximated using Satterthwaite approximation using the R package “lme4”. Significance values were thresholded for family error rate using an optode-wise false discovery rate.
Models here are reported in a similar style to R syntax. LME models for the dependent behavioral metrics of Response Time and SAT-Score were constructed with Task Type, Clinical Group, and Duration as candidate fixed effects and Subject as a random effect with a slope fit for each Block.
Behavioral models were constructed from the initial models:
To simplify the interpretation of the behavioral models, terms removed through the examination of the full model permutations and the optimal model based on the Akaike Information Criterion (AIC) was analyzed. Models were with an AIC score of difference greater than 2 were considered to be statistically different.
In order to test the effect of task parameters and clinical status on cerebral hemodynamic biomarkers, [HbO], [Hb], and [Oxy] were assessed as dependent measures in separate LME models. Three models were constructed in order to examine the general response to task performance (1), performance sensitivity within the vSAT (2), and the contribution of clinical status to observed activity (3).
In the first model, the presence of group differences during task performance was estimated using Task Type, Score, and Clinical Group as fixed effects:
In the second model, the relationship between cerebral hemodynamics during the vSAT and individualized susceptibility to attentional modulation was assessed using Score Difference and Group as fixed effects:
In the third model, we examined the influence of clinical status using Task-Type and total PANSS score as fixed effects:
Selected fNIRS spatial parametric maps are presented using the calculated F-statistics and thresholded using statistical significance for visualization purposes for individual model parameters. Statistical significance of model fixed effects was assessed using the Satterthwaite approximation for degrees of freedom.