Title.
Reward and executive control network resting-state functional connectivity is associated with impulsivity during reward-based decision making for cocaine users.
Abstract.
Background.
Cocaine addiction is related to impulsive decision making that is mediated by brain circuitry involved in reward processing and executive functions, such as cognitive control and attentional salience. Resting-state functional connectivity between reward and executive control circuitry is altered among cocaine users, with concomitant deficits in impulsivity and learning. Prior research has examined how select brain regions interact to influence impulsive decision making for drug users; however, research examining interactions between large-scale brain networks and impulsive behavior is limited.
Methods.
The current study compared reward and executive control network resting-state functional connectivity and its relationship to impulsive decision making between cocaine users (n=37) and non-cocaine using control participants (n=35). Participants completed computerized decision-making tasks and a separate resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging scan. Data underwent independent component, dual regression, and linear regression moderation analyses.
Results.
Higher impulsivity on the Balloon Analogue Risk Task (BART) was associated with inverse resting-state connectivity between the left cognitive control and subgenual anterior cingulate extended reward networks for cocaine users, while the opposite was found for controls. Less impulsivity on the monetary choice questionnaire was associated with stronger positive resting-state connectivity between the attentional salience and striatal core reward networks for controls, while cocaine users showed no association between impulsivity and resting-state connectivity of these networks.
Conclusions.
Cocaine users show aberrant associations between reward-executive control resting-state network coupling and impulsive decision making. The findings support the conclusion that an imbalance between reward and executive control circuitry contributes to impulsivity in drug use.
Introduction.
Addiction is characterized by impulsive decision making that can lead to harmful longterm consequences. The progression from controlled, voluntary drug use to compulsive drug taking has been described as a shift from flexible prefrontal cortical control to automatic responding driven by corticostriatal circuitry. The brain circuits that are implicated in addiction comprise several intrinsic functional neural networks that coordinate decision-making and learning. Measuring spontaneous, low-frequency fluctuations in neural activity throughout the brain during rest, commonly called resting-state functional connectivity (rsFC), provides a snapshot of the strength of functional connections between neural networks. Addiction is associated with altered functional connectivity within corticostriatal networks that manage reward expectancies and learning, as well as executive control networks involved in attentional salience and cognitive control.
Compared to non-drug-using controls, cocaine users have reduced connectivity within corticostriatal reward circuitry, which is predictive of compulsive drug use and relapse. The core and extended reward networks are two distinct functional networks along the mesostriatal and mesolimbic dopamine pathways, respectively. The core reward network is comprised of the thalamus and basal ganglia, including the dorsal and ventral striatum, regions that are often implicated in reactivity to drug use and drug cues. Acute drug administration alters neurotransmitter activity throughout this network and ultimately changes voluntary drug use into the compulsive drug taking behavior that is characteristic of addiction. The core reward network is functionally connected to an extended reward network consisting of the subgenual anterior cingulate cortex (ACC), medial orbitofrontal cortex (OFC), and medial prefrontal cortex (PFC). The extended reward network is involved in the valuation and anticipation of drug rewards and drives drug urges and preoccupation with use, especially during withdrawal.
Cocaine users also show altered functional connectivity within select cortical brain regions associated with executive control, including the cognitive control and attentional salience networks. The bilateral frontoparietal cortices encompassing the dorsolateral PFC (DLPFC) and posterior parietal cortex, mediate cognitive control functions such as inhibitory control, planning, and complex decision making. Functional activation of this network has been shown to be altered for cocaine users compared to controls during inhibitory control tasks such as the Stroop and Go/No-Go tasks. The attentional salience network identifies salient external and interoceptive stimuli to inform decision making. Cocaine users show aberrant rsFC of key regions in the salience network with other cortical regions involved in decision making compared to controls.
Connectivity between reward and cortical executive control networks differentiate cocaine users from control participants. Studies examining functional network interactions in the context of addictive behaviors, however, are still limited. The current study aimed to determine if altered rsFC between large-scale reward and executive control functional networks is predictive of impulsivity for cocaine users on three distinct decision-making tasks. The tasks included the Monetary Choice Questionnaire (MCQ), measuring delay discounting, the Iowa Gambling Task (IGT), measuring reward-based learning, and the Balloon Analogue Risk Task (BART), measuring risk-taking propensity. These tasks all engage the core and extended reward networks and the cognitive control and attentional salience networks. Yet, the function of these networks differs for each task and may help to elucidate specific cocaine-related alterations in functional network connectivity that are associated with impulsive behavior.
The MCQ offers participants a series of choices between smaller, immediate monetary rewards and larger, delayed monetary rewards. Prior research shows that both the core and extended reward networks are involved in the choice of immediate rewards, while the activation of the insular cortex in the attentional salience network has been linked specifically to the choice of delayed rewards. The cognitive control network is engaged during all monetary decisions and activity within the network increases with decision difficulty. Increased PFC cognitive control network connectivity has been linked to more delay discounting for cocaine users and methamphetamine users showed increased cognitive control network activity during easy monetary choices compared to controls; however, this activation may have been compensatory, since it was not associated with MCQ task performance. Given that stimulant users consistently choose smaller immediate monetary rewards over larger later monetary rewards, we expected to see higher discounting rates to be associated with a negative correlation, or imbalance, between the reward networks involved in immediate reward choices and the attentional salience network involved in delayed reward choices for cocaine users. Such a finding would lend support for the overvaluation of immediate rewards and undervaluation of delayed rewards in addiction.
During the BART, a measure of risk-taking propensity, players accrue 1 cent for each balloon pump, but risk losing their money for that round if the balloon explodes. Risk taking in the form of balloon pumps consistently activates mesostriatal regions in the core reward network as well as the bilateral attentional salience and cognitive control networks. While some studies show activation of vmPFC and ACC of the extended reward network during balloon pumps, deactivations during balloon pumps is more commonly found with fMRI. A prior study correlated rsFC to BOLD activation during the BART and found that less right DLPFC modulation of risk during the BART was linked with increased whole-brain connectivity of a core reward seed network for methamphetamine users, and decreased connectivity of a right cognitive control seed network for controls. In this case, stronger links between reward and cognitive control circuitry appear to promote more balloon pumps (i.e., risk) during the task for stimulant users. Therefore, we expected higher risk-taking propensity to be associated with stronger connectivity between the reward and cognitive control networks for cocaine users. Specifically, we expected to see stronger positive connectivity with the core reward network and stronger inverse connectivity with the extended reward network given their direction of task activation.
During the IGT, players choose from four card decks that have varying probabilities of winning and losing money with the end goal of learning which decks are advantageous. Expected gains for card choices has been linked with extended reward activity while expected risk and learning from unanticipated outcomes during the IGT has been linked with core reward network activity. Improvement in IGT performance is associated with activation in both the cognitive control and attentional salience networks. Stimulant users show deficits in contingency-based learning on the IGT, which has been associated with increased right-sided extended reward (i.e., medial OFC) and decreased right-sided cognitive control (i.e., DLPFC) network activity compared to controls in a study using positron emission tomography (PET). A separate study found that hyperperfusion in the left cognitive control network at rest was linked to worse IGT performance for cocaine users. Given these findings, we expected a negative correlation of the extended reward network and cognitive control network to be linked to worse learning on the IGT, which would support hypotheses that addiction is characterized by overvaluation of expected gains and reduced cognitive control.
Materials and methods.
Participants.
The sample included 37 cocaine users and 35 non-cocaine users (controls) who participated in one of two fMRI studies assessing the effects of cocaine and HIV on brain function and decision making. The current analysis included only HIV-negative participants, verified with an OraQuick® rapid HIV test. Cocaine users met the following criteria: ≥3 days of past-month cocaine use or a cocaine-positive urine drug screen, ≥1 year of regular cocaine use, and lifetime cocaine dependence. Current alcohol and marijuana dependence were permitted if cocaine dependence was the principal diagnosis. The control group met the following criteria: no lifetime cocaine use disorder, no history of regular cocaine use, 0 days of cocaine use in the past year, and a cocaine-negative drug screen. Past alcohol and marijuana dependence in full sustained remission were permitted. In all groups, alcohol, marijuana, and nicotine use were permitted, and for all other drugs, individuals were excluded for lifetime dependence, history of >2 years of regular use, and/or a positive drug screen (except for prescribed medications). Additional exclusion criteria were: English non-fluency or illiteracy; <8th grade education; severe learning disability with functional impairment; serious neurological disorders (e.g., multiple sclerosis); lifetime history of severe head trauma with loss of consciousness >30 minutes and persistent functional decline; indicators of severe mental illness or acute psychiatric distress (e.g., schizophrenia, major depressive disorder with suicidal ideation); pregnancy; physical disabilities impeding participation (e.g., blindness); and impaired mental status.
Procedures.
Participants were recruited from the Raleigh-Durham area between October 2011 and May 2015 via advertisements in local newspapers and websites, flyers and brochures at community-based organizations, and participant referrals. After a brief telephone pre-screen, interested individuals completed a comprehensive in-person screening of psychiatric, substance abuse, and medical histories and urine drug and pregnancy testing, as described previously. Participants also provided a release of information for research staff to request and review their medical records to corroborate self-reported medical history. Eligible participants returned to complete a neurobehavioral assessment that included a neuropsychological battery and computerized decision-making tasks, and an MRI brain scan. Participants were instructed to abstain from using cocaine or other drugs for at least four hours prior to the MRI scan depending on the study protocol. Smokers were allowed to smoke prior to the scan to avoid nicotine withdrawal effects. All procedures were approved by the institutional review boards at Duke University Health System and University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.
Computerized decision-making tasks.
During the neurobehavioral assessment, participants completed the BART, MCQ, and IGT. For the BART, participants use a virtual balloon pump to blow up a series of 30 balloons, accruing 1 cent in a temporary bank for each pump. However, if the balloon explodes, all money for that balloon is lost. Risk taking propensity was defined as the average number of pumps on un-popped balloons, with higher scores indicating higher risk-taking propensity.
Participants completed an adapted version of the MCQ during which they made 36 choices between smaller immediate rewards (ranging from $5 to $80) and larger delayed rewards (ranging from $25 to $85 and from 1 to 186 days). An individual’s point of indifference where the perceived value of a smaller immediate reward is equivalent to a larger delayed reward was computed using the following hyperbolic function: Vimmediate= Vdelayed/(1 + kD), in which V is value in dollars, D is delay in days, and k is a free parameter that determines the discount rate. K values ranged from 0.00016 to 4.00 and the natural log of the mean k value was used for analyses. This task was adapted from the original scale to include nine extra items to accommodate a wider range in delay discounting (impulsive) behavior for cocaine users whose scores may be limited by a ceiling effect [see for details].
For the IGT, participants selected cards from four decks to accumulate as much money as possible. All cards were followed by feedback that the participant won a specified monetary amount, but some cards were also followed by feedback that the participant lost a specified monetary amount in addition to their win amount. A green bar increased in size on the screen for each win amount and a red bar increased in size for each loss amount. A score of contingency-based learning was determined by the number of cards picked from the negative-expected-value decks subtracted from the number of cards picked from the positive-expected-value decks. Higher scores indicate better contingency-based learning.
MRI data acquisition.
All scans were performed at Duke University Hospital using a 3T GE MR750 (Milwaukee, WI, USA) scanner with an eight-channel head coil. Whole-brain BOLD images were collected using T2*-weighted echo-planar imaging with the following parameters: TR=2s; TE=27ms (study 1) or 25 ms (study 2); FOV=24cm; in-plane matrix size= 64 × 64; and slice thickness= 3.8mm, resulting in 39 axial slices (study 1) or 35 slices (study 2), each with a voxel size of 3.75mm × 3.75mm × 3.8mm, for a total of 150 (study 1) or 156 volumes (study 2). Participants were instructed to view a cross-hair displayed via projector onto a screen within the scanner bore. Tl-weighted structural images used for registration were acquired with the following parameters: TR=8.096ms (study 1) and 8.156ms (study 2); TE=3.18ms; FOV=25.6cm; flip angle=12°; in-plane matrix size=256×256; slice thickness=lmm; and number of slices = 166. There was a similar proportion of participants from each study in the cocaine use and control groups (χ2(1, 72)=0.83, p=.36).
2.5 Data analysis.
Standard flvfRI preprocessing..
Image preprocessing and analyses were performed with FSL 5.0.1. Images were skull-stripped, corrected for slice timing, registered to high resolution anatomical images (full search, 12 degrees of freedom [DOF]) and to standard MNI-152 space (nonlinear registration, normal search, 12 DOF), spatially smoothed (full-width-half-maximum= 6mm), and intensity normalized (mean= 1000). All scans were shortened to 145 volumes during preprocessing.
Given the sensitivity of resting state analyses to motion artifacts and other forms of signal noise, the data underwent extensive preprocessing. FSL’s MCFLIRT intra-modal motion correction tool was used to correct for motion parameters. No participants were excluded for relative mean displacement >0.3 mm (M= 0.09 mm, SD= 0.05). The preprocessed functional data were further motion-corrected with independent component analysis-based automatic removal of motion artifacts (ICA-AROMA), which employs an algorithm to identify and regress out signal associated with artifacts, while preserving signal of interest. As the final preprocessing step, a high-pass temporal filter of 100 seconds was applied and the filtered, denoised data were registered to MNI standard space. Using FSL’s motion outliers tool, cocaine users had higher average root mean square intensity differences (refrms) for each run after correction with ICA-AROMA (t(70)=2.77, p=.007). To control for group differences, refrms was included as a covariate in all group-level analyses. Finally, as described in the next section, probabilistic independent component analysis (PICA) was used to isolate artifactual motion-related networks from our networks of interest.
Network identification..
To identify reward and executive control networks, functional runs from all participants were subjected to PICA using MELODIC with multi-session temporal concatenation and automatic component estimation. Pre-processing in MELODIC included masking of non-brain voxels, voxel-wise de-meaning of the data, and normalization of the voxel-wise variance. Component maps were thresholded using an alternative hypothesis test based on fitting a Gaussian/gamma mixture model to the distribution of voxel intensities within spatial maps and controlling the local false-discovery rate at p < 0.05. The analysis resulted in 29 independent components (automatic estimation).
Network identification..
Networks of interest were chosen a priori from independent component network (ICN) templates identified by. The networks of interest for the current study included the: 1) core reward network located in the bilateral basal ganglia (BG) and thalamus (Laird ICN 3); 2) extended reward network in the subgenual ACC and OFC (Laird ICN 2); 3) attentional salience network in the bilateral anterior insula, frontal opercula, and ACC (Laird ICN 4); and right and left-lateralized fronto-parietal cognitive control networks (Laird ICNs 15 and 18, respectively).
To identify the components derived from our own study sample that best represented the Laird ICN templates of interest, spatial partial correlations were run with FSLUTILS on the 29 components derived from the current sample with the five ICN templates provided by Laird and colleagues. The sample components with the strongest correlations to each ICN templates of interest were used in all subsequent analyses. Only correlations greater than 0.2 were considered and the strongest correlations ranged from 0.40 to 0.60. See Figure 1 for the final set of ICA components and correlation coefficients with the Laird ICNs of interest.
Dual regression..
Dual regression was conducted to estimate a version of each group-level spatial map and time-course for each participant’s 4D data. In stage one, the group spatial maps were regressed onto each participant’s 4D dataset to give a set of time-courses. In stage two, those time-courses were then regressed onto the same 4D dataset to get a subject-specific set of spatial maps. This analysis resulted in a component time-course and spatial map for each subject and each component. We performed a small-volume correction by restricting the analysis to only include voxels within a component mask derived from the group-ICA analysis that was chosen a priori. To do this, the group-ICA components were thresholded at p≤.05, binarized, and included in the dual-regression script as masks for stages one and two, and only stage one time-courses and stage two spatial maps for the masked components were included in subsequent analyses.
Between-network connectivity..
We used the time-courses from the first stage of the dual-regression analyses to conduct partial correlations on the components for each subject. The time-courses consisted of component connectivity estimates (volume-wise slope in the regression) for each of the 145 volumes for each component. This resulted in a correlation matrix in which each element was the pairwise association between two networks. The resulting correlation coefficients of rsFC between the resting state networks of interest were then transformed to Fisher’s Z statistics to normalize the distributions. Between-network connectivity strength was compared across groups with a series of one-way analyses of covariance with age, gender, years of education, and motion (refrms) as covariates using SPSS Version 22.
Moderation analyses..
To determine if cocaine use moderated the association between rsFC and impulsivity, group by rsFC interactions on task scores were examined using Process software in SPSS. We tested for group by rsFC interaction effects on task performance with age, gender, years of education, and motion (refrms) included as covariates.