Title.
Association Between Age and Familial Risk for Alcoholism on Functional Connectivity in Adolescence.
Abstract.
Objective.
Youth with a family history of alcohol use disorder (family history positive [FHP]) are at increased risk for developing maladaptive substance use relative to family history negative (FHN) peers. Building on earlier studies demonstrating morphological differences and distinct patterns of neural activation in FHP, the purpose of the present study was to investigate differential intrinsic functional connectivity among brain networks indexing premorbid risk of developing alcohol use disorder (AUD).
Method.
The current study examined intrinsic functional connectivity using resting state functional magnetic resonance imaging in 191 adolescents 13 to 18 years of age with and without family history of AUD via independent component analysis, a method enabling data-driven investigation of internetwork and intranetwork connectivity among brain regions at rest.
Results.
Analyses revealed significantly lower intranetwork connectivity in FHP compared to FHN participants between the dorsal premotor cortex and other sensorimotor network regions. Reduced intranetwork connectivity in this region was further correlated with the number of biological family members with AUD and mood disorders. Robust differences were also evident in internetwork connectivity as a function of age. However, there was no evidence for family history by age interactions.
Conclusion.
Intra- but not internetwork connectivity appears to differentiate FHP and FHN adolescents, whereas age differences within adolescence are marked by differences in internetwork connectivity.
It has long been established that alcohol use disorders (AUDs) cluster in families and involve a genetic contribution. Youth with a family history of alcohol use are at greater risk for developing disordered alcohol use relative to the general population, and, more specifically, individuals with a greater density of family members with AUDs are more likely to develop AUDs themselves. Youth with a family history of AUDs have a higher prevalence of alcohol dependence and engage in more severe consumption patterns.
Substance-naive FHP youth demonstrate a variety of differences relative to participants without a family history of AUDs, including reductions in cortical thickness and gray matter volume, as well as reduced volume in nucleus accumbens and other subcortical regions. Alcohol-naive FHP adolescents and young adults also exhibit reduced inhibitory response (eg, reduced activation in left middle frontal gyrus) as well as atypical activation of reward processing and executive function regions. Overall, previous work implicates multiple interacting neurological systems in increased risk of FHP youth for developing maladaptive alcohol use, including regions involved in executive function, cognitive control, and reward processing. Therefore, underlying neurobiological risk may reflect atypical functional connectivity patterns between cortical and subcortical brain regions.
Although some prior work has examined task-based functional connectivity in FHP individuals, research examining resting state connectivity and focusing on intrinsic functional brain networks in FHP participants has been limited. Using aggregated task data to index inherent connectivity, Herting et al. demonstrated reduced functional connectivity between the cerebellum and bilateral anterior prefrontal cortices among FHP youth (n = 13) relative to FHN participants (n = 14), reinforcing previous findings of atypical cognitive control in FHPs. Cservenka et al. demonstrated reduced connectivity among the left NAcc, left postcentral gyrus, and bilateral inferior frontal gyri using resting state functional magnetic resonance imaging (rsfMRI) in a sample of 97 youth (n = 47 family history positive, n = 50 family history negative). These findings suggest suboptimal coordination of appetitive and reward networks with those implicated in cognitive control, consistent with the increased risk of these youth for engaging in risky, reward-driven behaviors, including alcohol use.
The studies described above are based on seed-based rsfMRI connectivity analyses. Although seed-based techniques allow targeted examination of specific hypotheses, they necessarily narrow the scope of investigation due to a priori seed specification, negating investigation of connectivity throughout the whole brain. By contrast, intrinsic connectivity, examined via the pattern of signal change among multiple brain regions over the course of rsfMRI, yields information about coactivation among regions throughout the brain and enables investigation of associations both within and across networks. Moving beyond a seed-based approach, Holla et al. recently conducted a whole-brain, graph theory analysis and reported disrupted connectivity in frontoparietal, cinguloopercular, sensorimotor, and cerebellar regions in a sample of 30 FHN and 30 FHP participants.
Taken together, these results point to the possibility of altered connectivity in multiple brain networks in FHP participants. However, the extent to which family history differences relate to and interact with age-related differences in functional connectivity remains unclear. Although various risky behaviors, including alcohol use, often emerge or peak during adolescence, this trend may depend on the age of the adolescent sample. Consequently, even across a relatively circumscribed age range, there may be age-related differences in functional connectivity, and age may moderate group differences in rsfMRI connectivity. Furthermore, connections between subcortical and cortical areas have been shown to decrease with age, whereas connections among cortical areas tend to increase. However, others have reported decreased correspondence between anatomically proximate brain regions and increased correspondence between anatomically distal regions among adults compared to children, suggesting that more work is needed to understand age-related changes in intrinsic connectivity, especially within the adolescent age range, and in relation to familial risk.
The current study expanded work in this area by examining intrinsic functional connectivity in a large sample of youth with and without family history of AUDs via independent component analysis (ICA), a method enabling data-driven, exploratory investigation of temporal correlations among brain regions at rest. Both internetwork and intranetwork connectivity were investigated to explore potential associations among family history and age with regard to synchrony among specific brain regions as well as between larger networks of regions. Importantly, we investigated 3 age groups of FHP and FHN participants— individuals 13 to 14 years, 15 to 16 years, and 17 to 18 years of age—to investigate the main effects of age in rsfMRI networks and to examine potential interactions between age and family history status (FHP versus FHN). Investigation of potential risk markers, such as altered internetwork and intranetwork connectivity, among large, well-characterized samples spanning the adolescent age range, as in the current work, is critical to better characterize factors contributing to the onset of maladaptive alcohol use among at-risk youth and to subsequently improve prevention and intervention efforts.
METHOD.
Participants.
Participants were 191 adolescents 13 to 18 years of age recruited via advertisements to the local community, through university e-mail listings, and from an additional ongoing study (Collaborative Studies on Genetics of Alcoholism [COGA]). The current study is part of a larger project on brain maturation and participant recruitment, for which inclusion/exclusion criteria, and participant characteristics have been previously reported. All participants were right-handed and had an IQ of 80 or higher as determined by the brief form of the Wechsler Abbreviated Scale of Intelligence. Table 1 provides demographic information. To be included in the study, participants were required to screen negative for severe head injury, severe headaches, seizures, stroke, or brain surgery; metal in the body; and history of psychiatric or neurological disorders with the exception of externalizing disorders (EDs) including attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder, oppositional-defiant disorder, conduct disorder, or antisocial personality disorder assessed using the Semi-Structured Assessment for the Genetics of Alcoholism (SSAGA). FHN participants (n = 96) were required to meet all of the above criteria for study participation in addition to lacking a biological parent with AUD and were also required to not have a history of ED. FHP and FHN participants were matched according to age (binned into 3 groups: 13 to 14 years, 15 to 16 years, and 17 to 18 years of age) and biological sex.
FHP participants (n = 95) had to have at least 1 biological parent screen positive (≥3 DSM-IV abuse or dependence items) for a history of AUD on the Semi-Structured Assessment for the Genetics of Alcoholism IV (SSAGA) interview. If the affected parent was unavailable for interview, the Family History Assessment Module (FHAM) was used with the other biological parent or the adolescent participant (if he/she was 18 years of age) as the informant. Participants in the FHN group were required to have both biological parents screen negative for AUD using the FHAM. The Family History Research Diagnostic Criteria (FHRDC) scale was administered to determine the number of first- and second-degree family members with AUD and mood disorders. Participants were excluded if their mothers reported having more than three drinks of alcohol per week at any point during pregnancy. The highest education level of the participant’s two parents was used as a proxy for socioeconomic status. Past or current use of substances other than alcohol, marijuana, and tobacco was exclusionary for FHP and FHN groups. Problem level use (scores > 7) on the Alcohol Use Disorders Identification Test (AUDIT) or the Alcohol, Smoking and Substance Involvement Screening Test (ASSIST) of alcohol, marijuana, and tobacco was also exclusionary.
Measures.
Neuropsychological tests assessing spatial working memory and executive functioning were administered using the Computerized Multiphasic Interactive Neuropsychological DualDisplay System (CMINDS) (http://www.neurocomp.com/Solutions/Cminds). The following computerized tests were administered: Trail Making Test Parts A and B (a measure of visual attention and task switching), Digit Span Forward and Backward (verbal working memory), and Visuospatial Sequencing Test Forward and Reverse (visuospatial working memory). The Visuospatial Sequencing Test was added after data collection had already begun, so these data are available for only 89 FHP (92.7%) and 81 FHN (84.4%) participants. Mean differences between groups have previously been reported by Henderson et al. Consequently, we report here correlations between connectivity and performance on these measures.
Image Acquisition.
Imaging was performed on a 3T Siemens (Erlangen, Germany) Trio MRI scanner equipped with a 12-channel head coil. A total of 32 slices 4 mm thick (in plane resolution 3.4 mm × 3.4 mm) were acquired using a T2* sensitive echoplanar imaging sequence (TR = 2000 milliseconds, TE = 30 milliseconds, flip angle = 77°). The resting state scan was acquired first and consisted of one run lasting 5 minutes 24 seconds. Before completing resting state scans, participants were told to lie in the scanner with eyes closed while thinking of nothing in particular. An MP-RAGE T1-weighted scan was also acquired for coregistration purposes (TR = 2300 milliseconds, TE = 2.82 milliseconds, flip angle = 10 degrees, series = interleaved). Participants were familiarized with the scanning procedure using an MRI simulator prior to the actual MRI scan.
Preprocessing.
Preprocessing was completed in AFNI and involved the following: (1) volume registration, (2) despiking, (3) spatial normalization to Montreal Neurological Institute (MNI) space using a 12-parameter affine model, (4) reslicing all data to 3-mm isotropic voxels, and (5) spatial smoothing (8mm FWHM). Participant motion was estimated using AFNI’s enorm function (https://afni.nimh.nih.gov/pub/dist/doc/program_help/1d_tool.py.html), which is similar to framewise displacement. Displacement in millimeters for three directions and three rotations from one volume to the next were calculated and then a median value created for each participant.
Independent Components Analysis.
Spatial ICA was performed using GIFT on preprocessed data for all participants. As implemented in GIFT, ICA identifies networks of brain regions with temporally correlated oscillations. The joint fMRI data from the participants is structured by a temporal concatenation approach that assumes a common aggregate spatial map (ie, common funcitonal anatomy) but allows for participant-specific differences in the time-dependent networks signals. Initial data reduction was achieved using a two-step standard principal components analysis process (participant- and group-level, as described by Erhardt et al.) with the full covariance matrix computed from stacked data sets in conjunction with packed storage, single precision, and selective eigen computation options available in GIFT. Resting state time series data were normalized by removing the image mean per timepoint. ICA was conducted using the FastICA algorithm, selecting the symmetrical approach, tanh nonlinearity, and stabilization parameters in GIFT. Algorithmic reliability was also evaluated because the methods used here are stochastic and iterative, such that model solutions vary across runs. Using ICASSO, each ICA was repeated 20 times to evaluate the reliability and stability of resultant components through bootstrapping and use of random start points (1,000 iterations). This step yields Iq values indexing compactness (solution variability across runs) and isolation (analogous to solution uniqueness) of component clusters. Iq values were satisfactory for all components (Iq range:.568–.999).
Finally, back-reconstruction was conducted via GICA, consistent with principal components analysis-based data-reduction methods employed in initial stages of the ICAs and with the low model order of the present analyses (in line with recommendations described in the GIFT manual, version 4.0, released in May 2015).
Component Extraction.
As in earlier work and in keeping with recommendations by Calhoun and de Lacy, 75 components were extracted. Individual components were reviewed and components that (1) had low power in the canonical 0.01 to 0.15 Hz frequency spectrum, (2) had signal primarily in white matter or cerebrospinal fluid, or (3) had motion-related “ringing” artifact present on the images were discarded. Specifically, all components were reviewed by three of the authors (A.E., A.W., and J.V.). Ratings were made on a 3-point scale (1 = retain; 2 = consider retaining, 3 = reject). Only components that had at least two retain votes and no reject votes were ultimately included. This approach resulted in 29 retained components (Figure 1). Components were labeled based on anatomical regions involved and correspondence to other ICA-based network results.
Intranetwork and Internetwork Connectivity Analyses.
Finally, intranetwork and internetwork connectivity were examined via the MANCOVAN toolbox available in GIFT. Temporal synchrony between component networks (ie, internetwork connectivity) was examined via functional network connectivity (FNC) correlations. FNC correlations allow inferences regarding coordinated activity between networks of interest (indexed by internetwork temporal synchrony) and potential associations among these indices and group, the number of first- and second-degree family members with an AUD, age, sex, and parental education level. In computing FNC correlations, network timecourses were detrended (filter cutoff = 0.15 Hz) but were not despiked to avoid redundancy with the initial preprocessing stage. Subsequently, correlations were computed between timecourses between components.
Temporal synchrony within component networks (ie, intranetwork connectivity) was examined via spatial maps, indexing the contribution of the time course to each voxel comprising a given component. Significant effects revealed in spatial maps are therefore interpreted as reflecting either heightened or reduced functional connectivity of a given voxel with respect to other voxels comprising a given component. All spatial maps were centered for ease of interpretation; all other parameters selected were identical to those for FNC correlations.
Main effects for family history group, age (13 – 14, 15 – 16, 17 – 18 years), and sex were included in the initial model. Subsequent follow-up analyses explored family history × age and family history × sex interactions. False discovery rate (FDR) correction for multiple comparisons was applied to the group ICA analyses (corrected p = .05). For intranetwork connectivity, FDR was applied for each component. For internetwork connectivity, FDR was applied to the group comparison of the FNC correlations. Associations between significant connectivity findings and neuropsychological performance on the Trails A, Trails B, Digit Span, and Visuospatial Sequencing tests were explored. Finally, for significant differences between family history groups, follow-up analyes were computed to determine whether these results were associated with number of first- and second-degree family members with AUD and/or mood disorders.