Title.
Relationships between abnormal neural activities and cognitive impairments in patients with drug-naive first-episode schizophrenia.
Abstract.
Background.
Prior resting state functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging studies (rs-fMRI) via the regional homogeneity (ReHo) method have demonstrated inconsistent and conflicting results because of several confounding factors, such as small sample size, medicinal influence, and illness duration. Relationships between ReHo measures and cognitive impairments in patients with drug-naive First-Episode Schizophrenia (dn-FES) are rarely reported. This study was conducted to explore the correlations between ReHo measures and cognitive deficits and clinical symptoms in patients with dn-FES.
Methods.
A total of 69 patients with dn-FES and 74 healthy controls were recruited. MATRICS Consensus Cognitive Battery (MCCB), Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale (WAIS), and Positive And Negative Syndrome Scale (PANSS) were used to assess cognitive function, Intelligence Quotient (IQ), and clinical symptoms, respectively. The correlations between ReHo maps and cognitive deficits and the severity of symptoms were examined using strict correlation analysis.
Results.
ReHo values in right Middle Frontal Gyrus (MFG) and Superior Frontal Gyrus (SFG) increased in dn-FES group, whereas ReHo values in right cuneus decreased. Correlation analysis showed that the ReHo values in right MFG positively correlated with attention/vigilance impairments, social cognition deficits, and the severity of clinical manifestations.
Conclusions.
These findings suggested that abnormal spontaneous activities in right MFG reflect illness severity and cognitive deficits, which also serve as a basis for establishing objective diagnostic markers and might be a clinical intervention target for treating patients with schizophrenia.
Background.
Schizophrenia (SZ) is a disabled mental illness that affects 0.5% of the China’s population. SZ patients show deficits in a broad array of domains, including perception, attention, memory, processing speed, reasoning, problem solving, and social cognition. Cognitive impairments are core features of SZ and have a substantial influence on patients’ psychosocial life. Cognitive impairments have also emerged as important targets of treatment-oriented research.
The Measurement and Treatment Research to Improve Cognition in Schizophrenia (MATRICS) Consensus Cognitive Battery (MCCB) is a standard cognitive battery and contains ten tests that measure seven cognitive domains: speed of processing, attention/vigilance, working memory, verbal learning, visual learning, reasoning and problem solving, and social cognition. Patients with SZ show significant cognitive deficits across multiple cognitive domains assessed with the MCCB.
Resting state functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (rs-fMRI) is a useful non-invasive neuroimaging technique for exploring local spontaneous neural activities and studying cognitive impairments. Regional homogeneity (ReHo) is a method employed in rs-fMRI and based on Kendall’s coefficient of concordance to measure the temporal synchronization of the time series of each voxel and compare it with that of its adjacent neighbors. Patients with SZ exhibit increased ReHo values in Dorsolateral Prefrontal Cortex (DLPFC), medial prefrontal cortex, angular gyrus, precentral gyrus, and superior temporal gyrus and decreased ReHo values in the superior temporal gyrus, occipital lobes, parietal lobule, precentral lobule, and postcentral gyrus. A recent study showed positive correlations between attention function and mean ReHo values in the left middle frontal gyrus, right inferior/ middle temporal gyrus, angular gyrus, and inferior/superior parietal lobe in healthy control group, but no significant correlations were found in SZ group.
ReHo studies on SZ have shown several promising findings, but such findings are inconsistent and conflicting. The reduced function of DLPFC plays a major role in pathophysiology of SZ and is associated with executive function deficits, response inhibition, and working memory errors. However, other brain areas, such as the superior temporal gyrus and precentral lobule, have yielded inconsistent and controversial results, and the relationships between abnormal brain activities and cognitive impairments have not been well investigated.
Numerous researchers attempted to map the neuronal pathophysiology in schizophrenia, but the results were often contradictory. The underlying etiology and pathophysiology of SZ remain unknown, and the following reasons should be considered: (1) existing studies have no adequate statistical power because of a small sample size; (2) in previous studies, the main threshold setting at a low or even incorrect level for multiple tests produced hundreds or even thousands of false positives to reflect true effects; this setting should be replicated in future studies, but strict correction should be performed to prevent type I errors; (3) the heterogeneity of patients related to multiple episode courses, illness duration, and medical effect causes inconsistent and contradictory findings.
In the current study, we hypothesized that patients with SZ exhibiting common or distinct brain activities would reflect the severity of psychotic symptoms and cognitive deficits. This study intended to investigate the ReHo and its association with the systematic cognitive dysfunction between patients with drug-naive First-Episode Schizophrenia (dn-FES) and matching healthy controls (HCs). It also aimed to explore the associations between signal changes and clinical symptoms and to provide more revealing and consistent findings. In addition, it is another purpose of the study to ascertain which functional brain aberrations would reflect the clinical moderators including illness severity and cognitive deficits.
Methods.
Participants.
Eighty-seven patients who had first-episode schizophrenia in the past three years and were never medicated were recruited from Nanjing Brain Hospital from January 2017 to December 2018. Eighty-two healthy controls matched in terms of age, gender and ethnicity were recruited from the same area through advertising. The general inclusion criteria for two groups were right handed, aged 16–45, and able to understand survey instructions and execute cognitive tests.
Two qualified clinical psychologists conducted the Mini-International Neuropsychiatric Interview (M.I.N.I.) to confirm diagnosis with the DSM-IV diagnostic criteria for schizophrenia and to exclude participants with a history of affective disorders, head trauma, and substance abuse. Healthy controls were also interviewed using the M.I.N.I. and excluded according to the same criteria adopted in screening patients as well as a major psychiatric disorder and family history of psychotic disorder. The study was approved by Nanjing Brain Hospital Ethics Committee. After comprehensively describing and explaining the study, a written informed consent was obtained from each participant.
Neuropsychological and clinical assessments.
The MCCB was used to assess cognitive function. The present study included nine tasks across seven cognitive domains, including speed of processing (Category Fluency, Trails A, Brief Assessment of Cognition in Schizophrenia Symbol Coding), attention/vigilance (Continuous Performance Test), working memory (Wechsler Memory Scale-III Spatial Span), verbal learning (Hopkins Verbal Learning Test–Revised), visual learning (Brief Visuospatial Memory Test–Revised), reasoning and problem solving (The Mazes test), and social cognition (Mayer–Salovey–Caruso Emotional Intelligence Test). We corrected the original score for age, gender, and education to obtain a T score to evaluate cognitive function, and high score showed a good performance. We adopted the Wechsler Adult Scale of Intelligence (WAIS) to test the Intelligence Quotient (IQ). Positive And Negative Syndrome Scale (PANSS) was used to assess symptoms of the patients, and the process was carried out by two experienced psychiatrists.
Image data acquisition.
MRI scanning was performed with a Siemens 3.0-T signal scanner, and a standard head coil padded with foam was used to reduce head motion and scanner noise. All of the participants lay in a supine position and were instructed to stay still, close their eyes, keep awake, and let their mind go blank. Three-dimensional T1-weighted sagittal images were acquired using a brain volume sequence with following parameters: repetition time (TR) = 2300 ms, echo time (TE) = 2.96 ms, inversion time = 900 ms, flip angle (FA) = 9°, field of view (FOV) = 256 mm × 256 mm, matrix = 256 × 256, slice thickness = 1 mm, 192 sagittal slices, and acquisition time = 554 s. The images were acquired using a gradient echo single-shot echo planar imaging sequence with the following parameters: TR/TE = 2500/30 ms, FOV = 224 mm × 224 mm, matrix = 64 × 64, FA = 90°, slice thickness = 3.5 mm, no gap, 37 interleaved transverse slices, 149 volumes, and acquisition time = 379 s.
Data preprocessing and processing.
Functional images were preprocessed with the Matlab2013b platform and the Data Processing Assistant for rs-fMRI (DPARSF4.4, advanced edition). Data were calculated in an original space warped by diffeomorphic anatomical registration through exponentiated Lie algebra (DARTEL). The first four volumes of the BOLD data were discarded for each subject to allow the signal to reach equilibrium. The remaining images were corrected for the acquisition time delay between slices. All of the subjects should have no > 2 mm maximum displacement in any plane, 2° of angular motion, and 0.2 mm mean frame-wise displacement. Then, the images were spatially realigned to the first image of each dataset, and movement parameters were assessed for each subject and corrected using the Friston 24 approach. Several nuisance covariates (global brain, white matter, and cerebrospinal fluid signals) were regressed. The datasets were band-pass filtered to reduce low-frequency drift and high-frequency physiological respiratory and cardiac noise (0.01 < f < 0.1 Hz). ReHo was calculated on a voxel-by-voxel basis by calculating Kendall’s coefficient of concordance on the basis of regional homogeneity hypothesis, which estimates similarity in the time series of a given voxel to its nearest 26 voxels. Each subject’s value was divided by the mean value of their whole-brain ReHo to eliminate the whole-brain effect to the utmost extent. The standardized ReHo images were spatially smoothed with a Gaussian filter with a full width at half maximum (FWHM) of 4 mm. Finally, ReHo values were used for statistical analysis.
Statistical analysis.
Statistical analysis was conducted using SPSS software (version20.0). Demographic and clinical variables of dn-FES and healthy controls were compared using two-sample t-test for continuous variables and chi-squared for categorical variables. F-test was used for data analysis of cognitive domains after taking smoking as a covariate controlling.
The ReHo maps were compared between the two groups by using the threshold-free cluster enhancement (TFCE) method with family wise-error (FWE) correction for multiple comparisons. Age, gender, education, and probability of gray matter were treated as covariates, and the threshold for significance was p < 0.05. In the following correlation analysis, the resultant significant ReHo map was used as inclusion mask.
Patients with schizophrenia were under voxel-wise correlation analysis to explore the correlations between the ReHo maps and the PANSS (positive symptoms, negative symptoms, general, and all totals) and the correlations between the ReHo maps and the MCCB (speed of processing, verbal learning, working memory, reasoning/problem solving, visual learning, attention/vigilance, social cognition, and overall composite). In addition, age, gender, education, illness duration and the PANSS total score were placed in the model as covariates. The permutation-based nonparametric inference was undertaken with 5000 permutations, and significance level was thresholded for the correction of multiple comparisons by using a TFCE of 0.05.
Availability of data and materials.
The data sets used and /or analyzed during the present study are available from the corresponding author on reasonable request.
Ethics approval and consent to participate.
All research procedures were approved by the Medical Research Ethics Committee of Nanjing Brain Hospital, and were conducted in accordance with the 1964 Helsinki declaration and its later amendments. Written informed consent of the schizophrenic patient was obtained from his/her legally authorized representative and the control provided written informed consent himself/herself after totally understanding the purpose of our study.
Consent for publication.
Not applicable.