Title.
Effect of ZNF804A gene polymorphism (rs1344706) on the plasticity of the functional coupling between the right dorsolateral prefrontal cortex and the contralateral hippocampal formation.
Abstract.
Highlights.
The working memory training strengthened the right DLPFC-left HF functional coupling.
Rs1344706 was associated with the right DLPFC-left HF functional coupling at pretest.
Rs1344706 impacted the plasticity of the right DLPFC-left HF functional coupling.
ZNF804A has now been recognized as a schizophrenia risk gene by multiple genome-wide association studies with its intronic polymorphism rs1344706 being reported as the first genome-wide significant risk variant for schizophrenia. Although the functional impact of this gene is still unknown, rs1344706’s contribution to the functional coupling between the right dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) and the contralateral hippocampal formation (HF) has been reported by several studies. The current study tested whether the right DLPFC-left HF functional coupling showed plasticity during cognitive training (Study I) and whether rs1344706 affected the plasticity (Study II). In Study I, we conducted a randomized controlled trial with 30 subjects receiving 20 sessions of adaptive training on a memory span task (the training group) and 30 subjects practicing on a non-adaptive easy version of the same memory span task for 20 sessions (the control group). All subjects were scanned using fMRI before and after the training. Analyses of resting-state and task-state fMRI data consistently showed that the adaptive memory span training significantly strengthened the right DLPFC-left HF functional coupling. In Study II, we conducted a genetic association study with 101 subjects (combining the data from the training group in Study I with those from an additional subsequent sample of 71 subjects who received the same training and fMRI scans). Results showed that rs1344706 was significantly associated with training-induced changes in functional coupling. Subjects carrying the non-risk allele (C) of rs1344706 showed greater training-induced plasticity than the risk allele (A) homozygotes. These findings expanded our current understanding of the functional impact of the schizophrenia risk variant of ZNF804A gene and suggested that the ZNF804A gene could be used as a prospective target for future antipsychotic drugs and clinical research.
Introduction.
Schizophrenia is a severe and complex neurodevelopmental disorder with a worldwide lifetime prevalence rate of about 1% and high heritability of about 81%. Previous studies have identified ZNF804A gene (2q32.1) as the first genome-wide significant susceptibility gene for schizophrenia. This finding was confirmed by the Schizophrenia Working Group of the Psychiatric Genomics Consortium (PGC2 release) in the largest meta-analysis of schizophrenia genome-wide association studies (GWASs) in the world. Recently, the largest GWAS of schizophrenia in the Han Chinese population also identified ZNF804A gene as a schizophrenia risk gene. ZNF804A contains a C2H2-type zinc finger domain and may play a role in DNA binding and transcription. Although the exact function of this gene is still unknown, some studies have suggested that this gene regulates multiple neurodevelopmental processes such as neurite formation.
From the studies that explored the functional impact of the ZNF804A gene polymorphisms, the most reproducible result is that the single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) rs1344706 contributes to the functional coupling between the right dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) and the contralateral hippocampal formation (HF). This association has been established based on data from both working memory tasks and resting state. DLPFC is activated when performing a working memory task but is suppressed during the resting state. In contrast, the HF is suppressed when performing a working memory task but is activated during the resting state. Evidence from both animal and human studies has suggested that the negative coupling between the two regions is crucial for working memory because it links two important networks for working memory, the central executive and the default mode networks. Studies of schizophrenia have considered this functional coupling as a potential intermediate phenotype.
Although lacking evidence on this functional coupling, some researchers have found functional coupling within the central executive network is responsive to training. An animal study found that working memory training strengthened the negative coupling between the prefrontal cortex and the HF. The authors also found that the functional coupling increased more after the training in wild-type mice than in mice that modeled a microdeletion on human chromosome 22 (22q11.2), one of the largest known genetic risk factors for schizophrenia. However, it is still unknown whether working memory training in human could also increase the coupling between the right DLPFC and the contralateral HF and whether the genetic risk variant of ZNF804A rs1344706 could contribute to the plasticity of the functional coupling.
In the current study, we first performed a randomized controlled trial (RCT) to investigate the effect of working memory training on the functional coupling between the right DLPFC and the left HF. We hypothesized that the training would increase (in the negative direction) this functional coupling based on the previous animal study. With a larger training sample, we performed a genetic association study to investigate the effect of ZNF804A gene rs1344706 on the training-related plasticity of this functional coupling. We hypothesized that subjects carrying the “A” allele (with an increased risk for schizophrenia) would show less increase in the functional coupling between the right DLPFC and the left HF after the training.
Materials and methods.
The protocols of both of the randomized controlled study (Study I) and the genetic association study (Study II) were reviewed and approved by the Institutional Review Board of the Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience and Learning at Beijing Normal University. Study I has been registered at the Chinese Clinical Trial Registry (http://www.chictr.org.cn; chiCTR-INR-17011728).
Subjects.
Participants in Study I included 60 healthy undergraduate student volunteers. Subjects were randomly allocated to either the training group (receiving adaptive training on a memory span task, N = 30) or the control group (repeatedly practicing on a non-adaptive easy version of the same memory span task, N = 30). All subjects were Han Chinese and gave written informed consent for this study. All subjects received the same set of fMRI scans at both pretest and posttest. CONSORT diagram for randomized controlled trials is shown in the Supplement Fig. S1.
For Study II, we recruited an additional sample of 71 undergraduate students who received the same training as the subjects in the training group of Study I. The combined 101 subjects were used to examine the effect of ZNF804A gene rs1344706 polymorphism on brain plasticity induced by the training.
Genotyping.
Genomic DNA for subjects who received adaptive training (N = 101) was extracted using the standard method. ZNF804A gene rs1344706 polymorphism was genotyped using Taqman allele-specific assays on the 7900HT Fast Real-Time PCR System (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA). The sample success rate for this SNP was 100%. The reproducibility of the genotyping was 100% according to a duplicate analysis of 40% of the genotypes.
Tasks for the training and the fMRI scans.
The working memory training task was a visual-spatial span task (see Supplement Fig. S2A). Stimuli were green-colored squares presented sequentially in a 5 × 5 empty grid on a computer screen. After an intermission, subjects were required to recall the sequence of locations by clicking on the empty grid. Each stimulus was presented for 500 ms, the interstimulus interval was also 500 ms, and the intermission was 1000 ms. Difficulty level was determined by the number of the stimuli. The task difficulty was adaptive to the participants’ performance for the adaptive training group. In the first training session, the training started with 3 stimuli and the number of stimuli automatically increased by 1 if the subjects made 5 continuous correct responses at the current level. In subsequent training session, the training started with 2 stimuli less than the maximum level in the previous session. For the non-adaptive training control group, the task difficulty was kept at a low level with 3 stimuli in all the training sessions. The training consisted of 20 sessions and was conducted in a neuropsychological laboratory over the course of 4 weeks (5 sessions per week, no>1 session per day). Each training session consisted of 80 trials (lasting 30 ~ 40 min). Then we revised the training task and created an assessment version, which included two trials for each span. Testing ended when subjects failed both trials. The length of the longest correct span was used to reflect the memory span.
The fMRI task was similar to the training task, which included the working memory condition (72 trials) and the baseline condition (36 trials) (see Supplement Fig. S2B). The stimuli were presented in cue-probe pairs. For the working memory condition, the green-colored cue stimuli were presented in the same way as in the training task and the number of the stimuli was set at 5. The probe stimulus was an empty grid. Subjects were asked to judge if the Arabic number indicated the correct order of the cue stimuli by pressing the button (left button for the correct number and right button for the incorrect number). For the baseline condition, the 5 red-colored cue stimuli were presented in a fixed order (top left corner → top right corner → bottom right corner → bottom left corner → center), and the probe stimuli were the same in all trials. Each trial started with a centrally placed fixation cross for 500 ms, followed by 5 cue stimuli. Each cue stimulus was presented for 500 ms, followed by a 500 ms interstimulus interval. After a 1000 ms intermission screen, probe stimuli were presented for 2000 ms.
fMRI data acquisition.
The imaging data were acquired at the Brain Imaging Center of Beijing Normal University. All subjects were scanned both before and after the training. Subjects lay supine in a Siemens TIM Trio 3T scanner (Siemens, Erlangen, Germany) with their head snugly fixed with straps and foam pads to restrict head movement. Resting-state images were acquired first, followed by a T1-weighted image scan. Subjects were then moved out of the scanner and given practice on the working memory task. After the practice, subjects went back into the scanner and were scanned while performing the working memory task.
Both resting-state and task-related fMRI were acquired axially using the same echo-planar imaging (EPI) sequence: repetition time (TR) = 2000 ms; echo time (TE) = 30 ms; flip angle (FA) = 90°; field of view (FOV) = 200 × 200 mm2; matrix size = 64 × 64; axial slices = 31; 4.0 mm slice thickness without gap (i.e. interleaved scan); voxel size = 3.125 × 3.125 × 4.0 mm3. During the resting-state fMRI data collection (240 volumes, lasting about 8 min), all subjects were required to keep their eyes closed, to stay still but relaxed, and not to think of anything in particular and not to fall asleep. During the task-related fMRI data collection (432 volumes, lasting about 14.4 min), all subjects were required to make their responses using a fiber-optic response box.
After the task scan, structural images were acquired using a T1-weighted sagittal 3D magnetization-prepared rapid gradient echo (MPRAGE) sequence: TR = 2530 ms; TE = 3.45 ms; FA = 7°; FOV = 256 × 256 mm2; matrix size = 256 × 256; slices = 176; thickness = 1.0 mm; voxel size = 1 × 1 × 1 mm3.
Resting-state fMRI data processing and functional connectivity analysis.
Preprocessing and analysis of resting-state fMRI data were implemented using Statistical Parametric Mapping software (SPM12.0, Wellcome Department of Cognitive Neurology, UCL, London, UK; https://www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm/). Preprocessing of the resting-state fMRI data included: (1) discarding the first 10 volumes for scanner stabilization to allow the participant to adapt to the scanner; (2) slice timing to correct the acquisition time differences between slices; (3) realigning the images to correct for head movement (any image with more than 2 mm displacement or 2° angular rotation in any direction was excluded); (4) segmenting the T1 image into cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), gray matter and white matter; (5) normalizing to the Montreal Neurological Institute (MNI) space using the transformation parameters estimated from each participant's T1 unified segmentation; (6) resampling to 3 mm isotropic voxels; (7) spatial smoothing with 8 mm full-width at half maximum (FWHM) of the Gaussian smoothing kernel; and (8) removing linear trends using a temporal filter (0.01–0.1 Hz) to reduce low-frequency drifts and high frequency physiological noise.
In the resting-state fMRI data analysis, we first calculated the functional connectivity between the right DLPFC and the left HF at the resting-state following the previous studies. The most significantly activated voxel in the right DLPFC (right BA9 + right BA46, without dilation, defined by the Wake Forest University PickAtlas toolbox; http://fmri.wfubmc.edu/software/PickAtlas) during the memory span task under fMRI scanning for each subject was used as the center to create a 6 mm sphere as the region of interest (ROI). The seed for the next analysis was the activated voxels (P < 0.05) within the sphere. Then the time series of the seed was extracted as the first eigenvariate and the functional connectivity of this seed was measured after regressing out the confounding factors of the signals from the mask of the CSF and the white matter, and six head movement parameters (three parameters of the displacement and three parameters of the angular rotation). Next, we used time point (posttest minus pretest) as a predictor to produce brain functional connectivity changes for each subject after training.
Task-state fMRI data processing and psychophysiological interaction (PPI) analysis.
Preprocessing and analysis of task-related fMRI data were conducted using SPM12.0. Preprocessing steps were similar to those used to preprocess resting-state fMRI data, including (1) realignment (subject with >2 mm translation or 2° rotation would be excluded); (2) segmentation of the T1 image; (3) normalizing to the MNI space using the transformation parameters estimated from each participant's T1 unified segmentation; (4) resampling to voxel size of 3 × 3 × 3 mm; and (5) spatial smoothing with 8 mm FWHM of the Gaussian smoothing kernel.
In this analysis, we focused our analysis on the cue phase of the correct trials which covered cognitive processing of both encoding and maintenance during the working memory task. Contrast (working memory condition minus baseline condition) image for each subject at each time point was produced. We conducted the PPI analysis to investigate the task-modulated functional coupling between the right DLPFC and left HF. The seed was the same as the above resting-state fMRI data analysis. A general linear model was constructed using the following regressors: the time course of signal in the seed (the physiological variable), the task-related predictor (working memory condition minus baseline condition, the psychological variable), and the interaction of the first two regressors (the PPI variable). In addition, white matter and cerebrospinal fluid signals, and six head motion parameters were also controlled as confounding factors. Then we used time point (posttest minus pretest) as a predictor to produce brain PPI changes for each subject after training. In these analyses, a high-pass filter at 128 s was used to remove noise associated with low-frequency confounds.
Data analysis.
In Study I, we first conducted two-sample T tests to investigate whether the right DLPFC-left HF coupling of at pretest was comparable between the two groups. Group was entered as an independent factor, and resting-state functional connectivity or task-state PPI at pretest was entered as the dependent factor. Afterwards, we used two-sample T tests to examine the group differences in the training effect. Group was entered as an independent factor, training-induced changes in coupling (posttest minus pretest) at resting state or task state were entered as the dependent factor.
In Study II, we first conducted multiple regression analyses to test the association between rs1344706 and the right DLPFC-left HF coupling at pretest to replicate previous finding. Genotype (AA vs. AC vs. CC) was entered as an independent factor, resting-state functional connectivity or task-state PPI images at pretest were entered as the dependent factor. Then we used multiple regression analysis to test the genotypic effect on the training-induced coupling changes. Genotype (AA vs. AC vs. CC) was entered as an independent factor, and training-induced coupling changes (posttest minus pretest) at resting state or task state were entered as the dependent factor.
All the above analyses were limited to the left HF (defined by the Wake Forest University PickAtlas toolbox; http://fmri.wfubmc.edu/software/PickAtlas). Significance level was set at P < 0.05 after family-wise error (FWE) correction at the peak-level. Significant results were followed up by post-hoc analysis using repeated measures ANOVA in SPSS 22.0.