Title.
Reduced Parietal Alpha Power and Psychotic Symptoms: Test-Retest Reliability of Resting-State Magnetoencephalography in Schizophrenia and Healthy Controls.
Abstract.
Background.
Despite increased reporting of resting-state magnetoencephalography (MEG), reliability of those measures remains scarce and predominately reported in healthy controls (HC). As such, there is limited knowledge on MEG resting-state reliability in schizophrenia (SZ).
Methods.
To address test-retest reliability in psychosis, a reproducibility study of 26 participants (13-SZ, 13-HC) was performed. We collected eyes open and eyes closed resting-state data during 4 separate instances (2 Visits, 2 runs per visit) to estimate spectral power reliability (power, normalized power, alpha reactivity) across one hour and one week. Intraclass correlation coefficients (ICCs) were calculated. For source modeling, we applied an anatomically constrained linear estimation inverse model known as dynamic statistical parametric mapping (MNE dSPM) and source-based connectivity using the weighted phase lag index.
Results.
Across one week there was excellent test-retest reliability in global spectral measures in theta-gamma bands (HC ICCAvg=0.87, SZ ICCAvg=0.87), regional spectral measures in all bands (HC ICCAvg=0.86, SZ ICCAvg=0.80), and parietal alpha measures (HC ICCAvg=0.90, SZ ICCAvg=0.84). Conversely, functional connectivity had poor reliability, as did source spectral power across one hour for SZ. Relative to HC, SZ also had reduced parietal alpha normalized power during eyes closed only, reduced alpha reactivity, and an association between higher PANSS positive scores and lower parietal alpha power.
Conclusions.
There was excellent to good test-retest reliability in most MEG spectral measures with a few exceptions in the schizophrenia patient group. Overall, these findings encourage the use of resting-state MEG while emphasizing the importance of determining reliability in clinical populations.
Introduction.
Spontaneous neural oscillations during a resting-state have been used to study abnormal neurophysiology in a variety of clinical disorders. MEG spectral power measures have been informative in schizophrenia and Alzheimer’s disease, while MEG functional connectivity has revealed patient abnormalities in schizophrenia, mild cognitive impairment, and depression. Assessing MEG-derived neural oscillations in clinical populations has the potential to yield biomarkers for early detection and diagnosis; therefore, demonstrating the reliability of MEG resting-state spectral power and functional connectivity in patients is critical. In HC, MEG spectral power in sensor and source space has good reliability in the theta, alpha, and beta bands (ICCs>0.6) over a 7 day test-retest interval, with lower reliability in delta and gamma bands in an eyes open resting-state. Reliability of MEG functional connectivity in HC has varied depending on connectivity measure, with good reliability of phase-locking values in alpha, beta, and gamma bands (ICCs>0.74) but poor reliability for phase-lag index across all frequencies (ICCs<0.1) over a 7 day test-retest interval. Reliability still needs to be quantified for other dependent variables, analysis methods and patient populations; thus far, the reliability of resting-state oscillatory measures in patients with schizophrenia remains unknown.
Schizophrenia has been conceptualized as a disorder of altered brain connectivity or “disconnectivity” based on disruptions in resting-state brain networks highlighting disorganization as a key process. There have been several MEG studies reporting disrupted neural oscillations and brain connectivity within either an eyes open (EO) or eyes closed (EC) resting-state in schizophrenia, for review refer to. Study results indicate that patients had increased slow-wave oscillatory activity within delta and theta frequencies, decreased gamma oscillatory activity, and decreased alpha oscillatory activity in widespread regions during EC and EO resting-states, along with reduced alpha-band connectivity in left prefrontal cortex and right superior temporal cortex, with clinical correlates ranging from associations with positive symptoms to negative symptoms depending on frequency band and brain region. Inconsistencies in cross-sectional literature may be attributed to variations in rest collected (EO vs EC), analysis method, measure used, and frequency band.
Narrowing the field on potential biomarkers for schizophrenia will require the reproducibility and reliability of previous findings before embarking on longitudinal studies. It is critical for MEG research to complete its own test-retest studies, as reliability may be influenced by modality, type of data (evoked vs. spontaneous), analysis method, and/or imaging site. Despite the same temporal resolution capabilities for EEG and MEG, MEG provides a number of advantages. For EEG, the poor conductivity of the skull creates a smearing effect such that the brain signals picked up by the electrodes are not necessarily from local generators. MEG offers a reference-free method for assessing electromagnetic signals which are not distorted by the differing conductivities of the scalp, skull, and brain, thereby allowing for improved spatial resolution and the application of simpler models for estimating sources of measured activity.
The current study was designed to examine global and regional test-retest reliability of neuromagnetic oscillatory measures across sensor and source MEG data in EC and EO resting-states. We collected resting-state data in 26 participants (13-SZ, 13-HC) during 2 visits to estimate reliability across one hour and one week in spectral power measures and functional connectivity. We hypothesized test-retest reliability would be moderately high in HC and lower in SZ. Alpha oscillatory activity in the parietal region was also examined based on its well-defined physiological properties, that is, the known suppression of response amplitude to eye opening in the parietal-occipital regions. Given that we collected both EC and EO data, we directly examined alpha reactivity. We hypothesized resting-state alpha oscillatory activity would be decreased in SZ when compared to HC, similar to previous MEG studies, partially attributed to potential thalamic abnormalities and thalamic connectivity aberrations previously reported in SZ, and the thalamus’ role in generating oscillatory activity in the parietal-occipital regions.
Materials and Methods.
Participants.
The current study included 13 individuals diagnosed with schizophrenia (SZ) and 13 healthy controls (HC), age and gender matched, Table 1. Informed consent was obtained from all participants according to institutional guidelines. The study was approved by the University of New Mexico Health Sciences Center Human Research Review Committee. All participants were within 21–49 years of age with no history of neurological disorder (e.g. epilepsy), no history of major head trauma (loss of consciousness >5 min), no current substance abuse diagnosis (excluding nicotine), no current dependence/abuse of PCP/amphetamine/cocaine within the past 12 months, and were not currently on mood stabilizers such as lithium or valproic acid. HC had IQ scores within the normal range and no history of developmental delays or neurological or psychiatric disorders based on the Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV-Non-patient (SCIDNP). HCs also did not have a family history of a psychotic disorder in first-degree relatives or a history of more than 1 lifetime depressive episode. Participants with schizophrenia were confirmed to have a DSM-IV-TR diagnosis of schizophrenia with the Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV-Patient (SCID-IP) and retrospective clinical stability. Participants were not excluded for nicotine use, however, they were not allowed to smoke within 1 hour of the MEG session or be more than 5 hours from their previous cigarette to avoid confounds of acute nicotine exposure or withdrawal. The following assessments were collected in SZ participants and reported in Table 1: Wechsler Test of Adult Reading (WTAR), Standard and Predicted (premorbid) IQ, Positive and Negative Syndrome Scale (PANSS), antipsychotic medication dose information, and duration of illness. PANSS scores were determined for each visit. Antipsychotic medication was converted to olanzapine equivalents for comparison between medication. Duration of illness was calculated by subtracting age at onset of psychotic symptoms from current age.
MEG Behavioral Tasks.
All participants had two visits across 7 days [HC=7.54 days ±60 minutes, SZ=7.84 days ±51 minutes]. Time of day between visits was matched to take into account circadian rhythm. Each visit began with a 10-minute rest task (referred to as Rest10) and ended with a 4-minute rest task (referred to as Rest4), see Figure 1. No responses were required from the participant; however, participants were instructed to attend the instructions for prompts to close their eyes or fixate on a white cross. Each task alternated between EC and EO. In total, resting-state activity was recorded 4 separate times with 14 minutes of EO and 14 minutes of EC.
MEG Data Acquisition.
MEG data were collected in a magnetically shielded room (Vacuumschmelze – Ak3B) at the Mind Research Network in Albuquerque, New Mexico using a 306-channel whole-head MEG system (Elekta Neuromag) with a sampling rate of 1000 Hz and an antialiasing filter with a passband of 0.1–330 Hz. Prior to data acquisition, four electromagnetic coils were placed on the participant’s mastoid bone and upper forehead, along with electro-oculogram and electrocardiogram channels. The location of the coils were registered to the nasion and preauricular points using three-dimensional digitization equipment (Polhemus FastTrack). Participants sat upright in the MEG during the task. Continuous Head Position Indicator (cHPI) monitoring allowed for motion correction. Head position was checked between visits. For the Rest10 task, average Euclidean distance between visits was 4.62 mm for HC and 6.06 mm for SZ. For the Rest4 task, the distance was 4.90 mm for HC and 6.12 mm for SZ. Head position consistency was similar between HC and SZ (all p’s>0.31).
Structural MRI Data Acquisition.
Structural MRIs were obtained for mapping source locations. Sagittal T1-weighted anatomical MR images were obtained using a Siemens TIM Trio 3 Tesla MRI system with a 32-channel head coil. Parameters of the multiecho 3D MPRAGE sequence were: TR/TE/TI = 2530/1.64, 3.5, 5.36, 7.22, 9.08/1200 ms, flip angle = 7°, field of view (FOV) = 256 mm x 256 mm, matrix = 256 × 256, 1 mm thick slice, 192 slices, GRAPPA acceleration = 2.
MEG Data Preprocessing.
Raw MEG data were filtered for noise and corrected for head motion with the Neuromag Max-Filter 2.2 software using the temporal extension of signal space separation (t-SSS) method with movement compensation. MEG data from each subject’s Visit 2 was transformed to Visit 1 head position using Maxfilter 2.2 MaxMove option to ensure equivalent sensor locations between visits. No downsampling of the data was implemented at the preprocessing stage. Heartbeat and eye-blink artifacts were automatically detected and removed using signal space projection (SSP) in MNE software. The continuous data were segmented into artifact-free 2 second epochs. Epochs in which the magnetic field exceeded 5 pT were rejected. HC had 2.4% and SZ had 4.6% of all epochs rejected. The total number of epochs used for further analysis included 401 EC, 402 EO epochs in HC, and 393 EC, 403 EO epochs in SZ. The number of closed/open epochs did not differ between groups (all p’s>0.25).
MEG Spectral Analyses.
For sensor analysis, we applied the summary spectral measures described in to simplify multi-channel MEG spectral data. Using only planar gradiometers, the sensor array was divided into left and right equivalent regions, see Figure 2. Spectral power was estimated using Matlab’s FFT function with a window size of 2048 for the following frequency bands: Delta (1–4 Hz), Theta (5–8 Hz), Alpha (9–13 Hz), Beta (14–29 Hz), and Gamma (31–58 Hz). Spectral measures included: power, normalized power, half-power, Shannon Spectral Entropy (SSE), and alpha reactivity. Normalized power was obtained by dividing the power within the frequency band by total 1–50 Hz power. Half power was defined as the midpoint frequency where half of the power is below/above for the 1–50 Hz range and indicates overall spectral power shifts from low to high frequencies. Alpha reactivity was calculated using normalized spectral power values with the following: (EC-EO)/EO. Global measures were the average of all regions and gradiometers.
For source analysis, the cortical surface of each participant was reconstructed from T1-weighted MRI files using FreeSurfer with a repeatedly subdivided octahedron as the spatial subsampling method, creating 4,098 locations per hemisphere with a source space of 4.9 mm. Source analysis was performed with MNE software using an anatomically constrained linear estimation inverse model known as dynamic statistical parametric mapping (dSPM). The regularization parameter corresponded with a signal-to-noise ratio of 3. Source orientation had a loose constraint of 0.2. The forward solution was calculated with a single layer (inner skull) boundary element method. The dSPM inverse model identified where the estimated current at each cortical surface vertex differed significantly from baseline noise (empty room data). Power spectral density (PSD) measures were computed from epochs using a multi-taper method with Discrete Prolate Spheroidal Sequence (DPSS) windows for each frequency band and region, using 7 tapers at 4 Hz and regions of interest based on the FreeSurfer DKT atlas. PSD represents the average spectral power derived from each voxel time series for each regional label. Global measures were data from all regional labels averaged. Normalized power was obtained by dividing the power within frequency band by the total 1–58 Hz power. Functional network connectivity was estimated using a debiased estimator of the squared weighted phase lag index (wPLI-debiased). The FNC measure, wPLI-debiased, detects true changes in phase-synchronization, while reducing the influence of common noise sources, changes in phase of coherency, and avoids spuriously increases by volume-conduction. It estimates the extent of observed phase leads and lags by the magnitude of the imaginary component of the cross-spectrum. All data were exported to MATLAB (2018a, MathWorks) and run through custom scripts.
Intraclass Correlation (ICC).
ICC estimates and their 95% confidence intervals were calculated in SPSS to assess the between and within-subject variability using a two-way mixed effects model with absolute agreement, single measurement criteria, also known as ICC (3,1) model. ICCs were calculated for multiple rest iterations: for each visit (across one hour), for each task (across one week) and for all runs. ICCs ranged from 0 to 1 (negative values scored as zero) with higher values indicating better reliability. Following the guidelines of we defined ICCs as: excellent reliability >0.75, good reliability 0.75–0.60, fair reliability 0.59–0.40, and poor reliability <0.40.
Statistical Analysis.
All statistics were performed using SPSS (version 25 for Macintosh). Mixed Effect Repeated Measures-Analysis of Variance (RM-ANOVAs) had statistical thresholds set at p<0.05. Greenhouse-Geisser corrections were made for sphericity violations. The between-subject factor was Group (HC,SZ), within-subject factors included Hemisphere (Left, Right), Resting-State (EO, EC), and/or Region [Superior Parietal (SupPar), Inferior Parietal (InfPar), Precuneus] depending on measure explored. Significant interactions were followed-up with separate one-way ANOVAs, or t-tests on the factors of interest with familywise multiple comparisons correction using false discovery rate (FDR) correction with q=0.05.