Title.
Early postpartum resting-state functional connectivity for mothers receiving buprenorphine treatment for opioid use disorder: A pilot study.
Abstract.
Between 1999 and 2014, the prevalence of opioid use disorder (OUD) among pregnant women quadrupled in the USA. The standard treatment for peripartum women with OUD is buprenorphine. However, the maternal behavior neurocircuit that regulates maternal behavior and mother-infant bonding has not been previously studied for human mothers receiving buprenorphine treatment for OUD (BT). Rodent research shows opioid effects on reciprocal inhibition between maternal care and defence maternal brain subsystems: the hypothalamus and periaqueductal gray, respectively. We conducted a longitudinal functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) pilot study in humans to specifically examine resting-state functional connectivity (rs-FC) between the periaqueductal gray and hypothalamus, as well as to explore associations with maternal bonding for BT. We studied 32 mothers who completed fMRI scans at 1 month (T1) and 4 months postpartum (T2), including seven mothers receiving buprenorphine for OUD and 25 non-OUD mothers as a comparison group (CG). The participants underwent a 6-minute resting-state fMRI scan at each time point. We measured potential bonding impairments using the Postpartum Bonding Questionnaire to explore how rs-FC with periaqueductal gray is associated with bonding impairments. Compared to CG, BT mothers differed in periaqueductal gray-dependent rs-FC with the hypothalamus, amygdala, insular cortex and other brain regions at T1, with many of these differences disappearing at T2, suggesting potential therapeutic effects of continuing buprenorphine treatment. In contrast, the “rejection and pathological anger” subscale of the Postpartum Bonding Questionnaire at T1 and T2 was associated with the T1-to-T2 increases in periaqueductal gray-dependent rs-FC with the hypothalamus and amygdala. Preliminary evidence links maternal bonding problems for mothers with OUD early in the postpartum to connectivity between specific care and defence maternal brain circuits, which may be mitigated by buprenorphine treatment. This exploratory study supports a potential mechanism for investigating both the therapeutic benefits and risks of opioids for maternal care and bonding with infants.
INTRODUCTION.
The opioid epidemic in the USA directly affects millions of women, with approximately 20% of all pregnant women being prescribed opioids and 2.5% chronically using opioids, and the number of pregnant women with opioid use disorder (OUD) having more than quadrupled from 1999 to 2014 (from 1.5 per 1,000 delivery hospitalisations to 6.5). The standard of care for OUD among pregnant women is opioid maintenance therapy with buprenorphine. Buprenorphine treatment for OUD (BT) is a common choice of treatment to mitigate the physiological stress associated with repeated cycles of maternal/foetal intoxication and withdrawal, preserving uterine stability via receptor occupancy. Compared to detoxification and possibly methadone treatment, BT may result in milder neonatal abstinence syndrome. However, the effects of buprenorphine treatment (BT) on the human maternal brain affected by OUD are not well understood. So far, there is just one study of mothers with polysubstance addictions showing reduced activation in reward regions of the brain in response to their own infant’s face cues; and one of mothers with BT for OUD vs depressed controls showing increased own vs other baby cry responses in multiple motivation brain regions.
Maternal substance use in general places their infants at a four-fold increased risk for abuse or neglect, contributing to as much as 80% of child maltreatment cases and 60% of infant out-of-home placements. Opioid-induced deficits in homologous maternal behaviours have also been established in animal models. These effects appear to be mediated in part by activation of mu-opioid receptors in the hypothalamic medial preoptic area (mPOA). More recent findings have implicated the activation of select opioid receptor subtypes within the periaqueductal gray (PAG) in dysregulating maternal behaviour.
The PAG plays a pivotal role in switching from maternal caregiving behaviours to defensive/aggressive behaviours such as predation in rodents that are known to be regulated by mu and kappa opioid receptor activity. Indeed, infusion of a mu-opioid receptor agonist into the ventrolateral PAG disrupts the balance of maternal care and aggression and kappa-opioid receptor antagonism, shifting behaviours from maternal caring to predation behaviours in rodents. These recent results are particularly relevant for mothers receiving buprenorphine for OUD (BT) because buprenorphine is both a partial mu-opioid receptor agonist and kappa-opioid receptor antagonist. The hypothalamus and PAG are key parts of a maternal behaviour neurocircuit (MBN) (Figure 1) that is necessary for the survival of mammals from well-developed rodent models. In this scheme, maternal caregiving and defensive/aggressive systems are balanced with reciprocal inhibition of the hypothalamic mPOA and PAG respectively. Thus, mothers would not be distracted from sensitive maternal care in the absence of threat or exhibit insensitive or aggressive behaviour toward their infant.
We postulate that human mothers have a homologous MBN (Figure 1), including opposing maternal “care” and “defence” subsystems, that reciprocally inhibit each other to balance maternal sensitive infant care behaviours with need for defensive/aggressive behaviours that maintain safety. The care subsystem includes the mPOA in hypothalamus, ventral tegmental area, nucleus accumbens and ventral pallidum that regulate maternal caregiving behaviours such as licking and grooming for rodents, as well as sensitive, attuned care, gentle gaze, voice, touch and movement for humans. In the defence subsystem, the PAG may activate maternal defensive behaviours, such as aggression toward intruders and predatory behaviours. Among humans, PAG has been activated a baby distress cry, with such activity being related to mental state talk. This is interesting because a mother would need to balance caring and defensive behaviours in response to a cry which may solicit care or signal emergent concerns for safety. The regulation of other regions of the two subsystems of the MBN to orchestrate parenting has been demonstrated with human functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) studies, including for the amygdala, insular cortex, orbitofrontal cortex (OFC) and hypothalamus in response to infant cues. These regions may also be affected by addiction and polysubstance use, suggesting the need for more research on task-based brain physiology in the maternal brain. There is growing recognition, however, that high-order cognitive and emotional function, such as required for human parenting, may depend on coherent activity between key brain regions within neurocircuits, rather than single regions.
Resting-state functional connectivity (rs-FC) is a method that is used in fMRI to examine regional interactions during a resting or task-negative state, during which time an explicit task is not being performed. Resting brain state conditions are observed through changes in blood-oxygen-level-dependent (BOLD) signals. Despite limitations of low temporal resolution and regional variation in neurovascular physiology, the resting state approach is useful to explore the brain’s functional organisation in terms of apparent functional connectivity It has revealed networks of synchronous activity that are consistently found in healthy subjects, as well as in different stages of consciousness, in mental disorders and across species. As in the present study, rs-FC may be particularly to pursue a priori hypotheses in established circuits.
So far, there are just one rodent and two human maternal brain studies using resting-state connectivity methods described above. Rat dams with early-life chronic social stress showed depressed maternal care specifically during early lactation, and changes in functional connectivity in regions associated with sensory processing, maternal and emotional responsiveness, memory and the reward pathway, including reduced PAG-anterior cingulate connectivity. Among human mothers, eight with depression vs nine healthy at 9 weeks postpartum, there was decreased functional connectivity in numerous corticolimbic circuits, such as coupling within the default mode network (DMN), including anterior cingulate cortex (ACC), inferior parietal cortex and precuneus, as well as between DMN nodes and amygdala. In another human study performed at 10 weeks postpartum, 14 depressed vs 23 healthy mothers showed decreased DMN activity using a PCC seed region. These results may be interpreted to reflect diminished self-reflection and social cognition, as well as thoughts about duties and responsibilities to others, which are important to parenting. Additional research related to the content of maternal thoughts during the resting phase may be important to clarify the relationship between maternal thoughts moods and caregiving in health and mental illness.
In the present study, we hypothesise that the specific functional connectivity between the hypothalamus and PAG, which are two functionally opposing regions in MBN, may be decreased in mothers receiving buprenorphine for OUD and relate to impaired bonding, consistent with rodent deficits in maternal behaviour with opioids. We thus examined rs-FC between the PAG and hypothalamus in BT mothers with reference to a comparison group (CG) of mothers who did not have OUD or receive any psychotrophic medication. Furthermore, to examine the roles of functional connectivity between PAG and hypothalamus in possible dysregulation of maternal behaviours, we also explored how the PAG-dependent rs-FC may be related to symptoms of mother-infant bonding impairments, as measured by the Postpartum Bonding Questionnaire (PBQ), in BT and CG mothers in the early postpartum period. The PBQ was chosen for this purpose because its subscales of Impaired Bonding (IB), Rejection and Pathological Anger (RPA) and Infant-Focused Anxiety (IFA) have been linked to maternal psychological abuse of infants and maternal depression in multiple cultures. We know that depression is common comorbidity of OUD and that depressive symptoms, even if not meeting the clinical threshold, can seriously risk adverse child outcomes across cognitive, behavioural and social domains.
MATERIALS AND METHODS.
Procedures.
Participants were recruited from community health clinics, primary care clinics, and the University of Michigan Medicine Centers. They received an initial screening in the third trimester of pregnancy and completed questionnaires before undergoing two fMRI scanning sessions, at 1 month postpartum (T1) and 4 months postpartum (T2). Participants with OUD were prescribed BT as part of routine medical care and there were no infant admissions for medical complications after initial neonatal abstinence syndrome. All procedures were approved by the Human Subject Institutional Review Board at University of Michigan.
Participants.
For the sample in the present study (n = 32), we included group of mothers who were maintained on buprenorphine replacement therapy for their OUD (BT) (n = 7, years of age; mean ± SD 29.86 ± 6.62 years) and a comparison group (CG) of mothers who reported no opioid or other substance uses or any psychotrophic medications (CG, n = 25, years of age; mean ± SD 27.62 ± 8.46 years). Mean ± SD ages for infants of early postpartum mothers were 0.08 ± 0.01 years for BT and 0.07 ± 0.27 years for CG. The BT mothers received buprenorphine medication during pregnancy and continued throughout the time of the study. The mean ± SD dose recorded every 2 weeks postpartum was 14.18 ± 3.35 mg, with six out of seven mothers stabilising between 12 and 16 mg.
Self-reported measure.
Postpartum bonding questionnaire.
The PBQ is a 25-item self-report questionnaire developed to screen early postpartum women for potential parent-infant bonding disorders. The PBQ consists of four subscales to indicate factors of clinical relevance, namely IB (subscale 1 with sensitivity of 0.82 for detecting mothers with bonding disorders) (e.g. “I feel distant from my baby”); RPA (subscale 2 with sensitivity of 0.88 for infant rejection and 0.67 for severe anger), identifies mothers with serious infant-oriented hostility (e.g. “I resent my baby”); IFA (subscale 3), which may be useful in anxious mothers (e.g. “My baby makes me feel anxious”); and subscale 4, which signals the presence of incipient abuse that would require urgent intervention (e.g. “I have done harmful things to my baby”). None of the participants indicated abuse from subscale 4 and only the first three subscales (IB, RPA and IFA) were examined in the current study.
Functional and structural magnetic resonance imaging.
Imaging data acquisition.
During the fMRI scanning session, each participant was positioned in a supine orientation with her head positioned in a head coil. Visual stimuli (a cross at the centre) were presented via a goggle system and NordicNeuroLab (Bergen, Norway) audio system. The fMRI scanning was performed with a 3.0 Tesla Philips magnetic resonance imaging scanner (Philips, Eindhoven, The Netherlands) using a standard eight-channel radiofrequency SENSE head coil. with the following acquisitions: (i) a high-resolution T1 scan was acquired to provide precise anatomical localisation (TR of 9.8 ms, TE = 459 ms, FA = 8°, FOV of 256 mm, slice thickness of 1.0 mm, 180 slices with 288 × 288 matrix per slice) and (ii) A run of T2*-weighted BOLD echo planar imaging sequence volumes was acquired for whole-brain fMRI during the resting-state task (180 frames, TR = 2000 ms, TE = 30 ms, FA = 90°, FOV = 220 mm, 42 contiguous axial slices, slice thickness = 2.8 mm with 64 × 64 matrix per slice, voxel size = 3.44 × 3.44 × 2.8 mm3), after discarding the first five initial frames to allow for equilibration of scanner signal.
Imaging data processing and analysis.
Functional MRI data were pre-processed and analysed using statistical parametric mapping software (SPM8; Welcome Department of Imaging Neuroscience, London, UK). Slice timing correction was performed using a middle slice as a reference (slice 21). After slice time correction, images within each run were realigned to the mean image of the first run to correct for movement. Realigned functional images and structural images were spatially normalised using the DARTEL method in SPM8. The normalised functional images were re-sliced to 2 × 2×2 mm voxels. Images were then spatially smoothed using a Gaussian filter with a full-width half-maximum value of 8 mm. To assess and mitigate movement artifact, we calculated the frame-wise displacement (FD), defined as the sum (in millimetres) of the absolute values of frame displacement in successive functional volumes, based on six translation and rotation parameters from the realignment file. Rotational displacements were converted from degrees to millimeters moved on the surface of a 50-mm sphere. A frame-scrubbing routine was used to censor out any frame with FD > 0.5 mm from the regression analysis described below, yielding a scrub ratio for each subject, with a cut-off of 60% censored-out frames for sample exclusion, in accordance with the literature showing that as many as 60% of frames can be removed and still yield analysable results. There was no BT vs CG difference in the averaged FD before scrubbing (BT: mean ± SD: 0.379 ± 0.063; CG: mean ± SD: 0.300 ± 0.028; F1,40 = 1.284, MSerror = 0.056, P = .264). This suggests no significant head movement as a potential confounding factor between groups. Three-compartment segmentation of the high-resolution structural image from the DARTEL normalisation were applied to the functional time series to extract cerebral spinal volume and white matter compartments, which then were subjected to a principal component analysis to identify the top five components in each, which should correspond to heart rate and respiratory effects on the BOLD signal. Adjusted time courses were derived from sequential regressions of the time series with the following regressors: linear trend of six motion parameters, their temporal derivatives, the quadratics of these 12 parameters, five components from the principal components analysis of cerebral spinal volume, five components of white matter, followed by band-pass filtering from 0.01 to 0.1 Hz, and then motion scrubbing. The seed mask of PAG, as a region of interest (ROI), in rs-fMRI analysis was generated using PICKATLAS software (WFU PickAtlas; http://fmri.wfubmc.edu/software/pickatlas) as a box-shaped mask centered at the ventrolateral PAG (MNI: x = 0, y = −27, z = −8, with 3 × 1 × 1 mm extensions), in accordance with the literature. In the first-level analysis, adjusted time courses were averaged across all voxels in the seed mask. The average time course in the seed was correlated with time courses from all other voxels in the brain, Fisher r-to-Z transformed, and taken to second level, between-group analyses. In the second-level analysis, statistical parametric maps in the first model were submitted to general linear models (GLMs) to test for the effects of interest. The effects of interest included the group difference (BT vs Controls) in the sample of 32 mothers and each of the three PBQ subscales in a subsample of BT and CG mothers (n = 5 in each group). All of the second-level models were controlled for whole-brain multiple comparisons at the cluster level for voxel-wise intensity threshold at P < .001, which is considered to yield reliable statistical inference. We also used Threshold-Free Cluster Enhancement (TFCE) method to perform family-wise small volume correction (s.v.c.) in a ROI mask of the hypothalamus (MNI: x =±4, y = −2, z = −12, with a 4-mm radius) to examine the PAG-hypothalamus functional connectivity in accordance with the hypothesis that the reciprocal inhibition between PAG and hypothalamus plays a key role with respect to regulating maternal behaviours.
Behavioural data analysis.
We investigated the associations between the PAG-hypothalamus functional connectivity and three subscales of PBQ (IB, RPA and IFA) at T1 and T2 in the early postpartum mothers, using bivariate Pearson’s r correlation analysis in SPSS, version 24 (IBM Corp., Armonk, NY, USA).