Title.
Dysbalanced Resting-State Functional Connectivity Within the Praxis Network Is Linked to Gesture Deficits in Schizophrenia.
Abstract.
Abstract.
Patients with schizophrenia frequently present deficits in gesture production and interpretation, greatly affecting their communication skills. As these gesture deficits can be found early in the course of illness and as they can predict later outcomes, exploring their neural basis may lead to a better understanding of schizophrenia. While gesturing has been reported to rely on a left lateralized network of brain regions, termed praxis network, in healthy subjects and lesioned patients, studies in patients with schizophrenia are sparse. It is currently unclear whether within-network connectivity at rest is linked to gesture deficit. Here, we compared the functional connectivity between regions of the praxis network at rest between 46 patients and 44 healthy controls. All participants completed a validated test of hand gesture performance before resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) was acquired. Patients performed gestures poorer than controls in all categories and domains. In patients, we also found significantly higher resting-state functional connectivity between left precentral gyrus and bilateral superior and inferior parietal lobule. Likewise, patients had higher connectivity from right precentral gyrus to left inferior and bilateral superior parietal lobule (SPL). In contrast, they exhibited lower connectivity between bilateral superior temporal gyrus (STG). Connectivity between right precentral gyrus and left SPL, as well as connectivity between bilateral STG, correlated with gesture performance in healthy controls. We failed to detect similar correlations in patients. We suggest that altered resting-state functional connectivity within the praxis network perturbs correct gesture planning in patients, reflecting the gesture deficit often seen in schizophrenia.
Introduction.
Gestures are an integral part of communication. They are crucial in face-to-face interaction. Patients with schizophrenia present deficits in recognition, interpretation, and performance of gestures. They tend to misinterpret incidental movements as gestures, more often fail to detect speech-gesture mismatch, produce less spontaneous gestures, and perform poorer than controls when prompted to conduct specific gestures. These impairments are part of a generalized nonverbal communication deficit in schizophrenia. Gesture deficits may occur in first episode or chronic patients. Gesture performance is associated with key schizophrenia symptoms, including motor abnormalities, impaired frontal lobe functioning, positive symptoms, poor working memory, and conceptual disorganization. Notably, gesture deficit predicts unfavorable functional outcome and negative symptoms after 6 months.
The neural correlates of gesture processing and production have been studied in healthy subjects and in patients with brain lesions. In healthy subjects, various gesture types and perception tasks consistently activate a left lateralized fronto-temporo-parietal network in fMRI studies. The network comprises the left inferior frontal gyrus (IFG), middle frontal gyrus (MFG), superior temporal gyrus (STG), middle temporal gyrus (MTG), as well as bilateral inferior parietal lobule (IPL) and superior parietal lobule (SPL). The lateralization of this praxis-network is independent of the performing hand (left vs right).
Lesion studies in apraxia following left hemispheric brain damage link apraxic gesture deficit with similar regions, namely left IPL, SPL, and IFG. Likewise, lesions in insula, primary motor, and sensory areas are associated with apraxic gesture deficits.
While healthy subjects provide an opportunity to study the neural basis of gesturing, apraxia following brain lesions clearly provides the possibility to study gesture deficits. However, findings in lesion studies are strongly influenced by regional vascular supply. In contrast, schizophrenia may serve as a model to this problem, as patients frequently present gesture deficits, but lack larger brain lesions.
Structural studies in schizophrenia reported lower gray matter density and cortical thinning in multiple regions of the praxis network in patients compared with healthy controls. Functional studies using fMRI found hypoactivation and dysconnectivity between left superior temporal sulcus (STS) and bilateral IFG in patients during processing of abstract co-speech gestures. An fMRI-study on pantomime of gestures (ie, performance on verbal command) reported patients to exhibit hypoactivation compared with controls in ventral and dorsal stream, motor cortex, and dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, but a hyperactivation in temporal poles, amygdala, and hippocampus. A study on brain activation during imitation of finger movements detected lower activation in STS in patients with schizophrenia compared with controls. In contrast, another study found no differences in brain activation between controls and patients with schizophrenia, neither during observation, imitation, nor during execution (ie, pantomime) of finger movements. However, both groups showed activations in the praxis network (eg, IPL, SPL, IFG). The underlying mechanism for the hypoactivations in schizophrenia remains unknown. One possible explanation is impaired information transfer between regions of the praxis network. Resting-state functional connectivity, as measured by synchronicity of spontaneous fluctuations of blood-oxygen-level-dependent (BOLD) signal, can be used as a marker of information transfer between brain regions.
Altered resting-state functional connectivity is a frequent finding in schizophrenia.Aberrant resting-state connectivity is already present in subjects at high clinical risk of psychosis and drug-naïve patients with schizophrenia. Altered connectivity has further been associated with schizophrenia symptoms such as motor signs, negative symptom severity, and disorganization symptoms. However, resting-state functional connectivity within the praxis network in schizophrenia has not been investigated.
In this study, we aimed to find neural correlates in the praxis network at rest that are associated with gesture deficit in schizophrenia. Given the structural alterations in the praxis network in schizophrenia, the hypoactivity during gesture tasks, and further notions of aberrant functional connectivity during co-speech gesture processing, we hypothesized lower resting-state connectivity within the praxis network in patients, particularly between IFG, IPL, and STG; ie, key regions most consistently activated during gesture tasks in healthy subjects, hypoactive in schizophrenia, and lesioned in apraxia. Furthermore, we hypothesized better gesture performance in schizophrenia individuals with increased resting-state connectivity in the praxis network.
Methods.
Participants.
We included 46 patients with schizophrenia spectrum disorders and 44 age-, sex-, and education-matched healthy controls. We have published behavioral data and fMRI task analyses in these participants before (eg, ). Patients were recruited from inpatient and outpatient departments of University Hospital of Psychiatry, Bern, Switzerland. Controls were recruited among staff and via advertisements. Exclusion criteria for both groups were substance abuse or dependence other than nicotine, current or history of medical conditions impairing movements, epilepsy, history of head trauma with loss of consciousness, and history of electroconvulsive therapy. Patients fulfilled DSM-5 criteria for schizophrenia, schizoaffective disorder, or schizophreniform disorder. Diagnosis was ensured using the Mini International Neuropsychiatric Interview and Comprehensive Assessment of Symptoms and History. Controls with a history of any psychiatric disorder or first-degree relatives with schizophrenia or schizoaffective disorder were excluded. All participants were right-handed according to the Edinburgh Handedness Inventory.We employed the Frontal Assessment Battery (FAB) and the Test of nonverbal Intelligence (TONI)in all participants, as well as the Positive and Negative Syndrome Scale (PANSS), the Abnormal Involuntary Movement Scale (AIMS), and the Bush-Francis Catatonia Rating Scale (BFCRS)in patients. Written informed consent was obtained from all participants. The study protocol adhered to the Declaration of Helsinki and was approved by the local Ethics Committee.
Gesture Assessment.
We evaluated gesture performance using the Test of Upper Limb Apraxia (TULIA). It consists of 48 items divided into imitation (upon demonstration) and pantomime (upon verbal command) domains. Both domains are further divided into 3 semantic categories: meaningless (gesture-like movements without semantic content), intransitive (communicative, non-object related), and transitive (object-related) gestures. Each item is scored on a 0–5 scale resulting in a maximum of 240 points. Higher score indicates better performance. The Test was recorded on video and analyzed by a rater who was blind to diagnoses following the TULIA scoring manual. To test laterality, the TULIA was performed bilaterally.
Image Acquisition.
We then acquired structural and functional imaging data. Imaging was conducted at the Institute of Neuroradiology at University Hospital of Bern on a 3T Siemens Magnetom Trio scanner (Siemens Medical Solutions) on the same day as the gesture behavior assessments.
First, we acquired structural T1-weighted modified driven equilibrium Fourier transform (MDEFT) images with 176 sagittal slices, matrix size of 256 × 256, FOV 256 × 256, yielding a voxel size of 1 × 1 × 1mm, repetition time (TR) 7.92 ms, echo time (TE) 2.48 ms, inversion time (TI) 910 ms and flip angle of 16°.
Second, we acquired a set of 256 functional BOLD T2* images with 38 transverse slices, matrix dimensions 64 × 64, FOV 230 × 230, yielding a voxel size of 3.59 × 3.59 × 3mm, TR 2000 ms resulting in 8.5 min sequence duration, TE 30 ms, flip angle 90°.
Preprocessing.
Preprocessing and analysis of imaging data were performed in CONN-toolbox (15.h, www.nitrc.org/projects/conn) for MATLAB (R2015a, MathWorks). We used its standard pipeline for preprocessing. This included segmentation and normalization of structural images to MNI template as well as slice-timing correction, realignment and unwarping, normalization to MNI space, coregistration to structural image, and smoothing with a Gaussian 8 mm FWHM kernel of functional images. Resulting images were detrended. We then performed subject-wise first-level analyses to account for white matter and cerebrospinal fluid signal, movement parameters, and outliers, which were detected using ART-toolbox (11-06, https://www.nitrc.org/projects/artifact_detect) included in CONN (global-signal Z-threshold: 9, subject motion thresholds: 2 mm, 0.02 rad). Finally, resulting timelines were band-pass filtered between 0.008 and 0.09 Hz.
Selection of Seed Regions.
We chose 11 ROIs for each hemisphere and used the gray matter (GM) Brodmann Area masks and the automated anatomical labeling (AAL) atlas in the Statistic Parametric Mapping (SPM) 12 (www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm). The selection of these ROIs is based on structural and functional findings in healthy participants and patients with schizophrenia. The ROIs included the bilateral insula, IPL, SPL, supramarginal gyrus, MTG, STG, IFG subdivided into pars opercularis, triangularis and orbitalis, superior frontal gyrus, and precentral gyrus.
Statistical Models.
Statistical analyses of clinical data were performed in IBM SPSS version 24. Between-group sex differences were calculated using a Chi-square test. We tested age, education, TONI, and FAB for normal distribution with Shapiro-Wilk tests and compared these variables between groups using 2-sample t-tests or Mann-Whitney U tests where appropriate.
We have previously investigated group differences and presentation/semantic effects of the TULIA scores of this sample using a repeated-measures ANOVA. Here, we also tested side (left or right hand) as possible within-subject factor in addition to domain (imitation or pantomime) and category (transitive, intransitive, or meaningless). The only between-subject factor was group. As performing side did not show any significant effect, we conducted all subsequent analyses with total TULIA-score of the right hand only. We considered 2-tailed P < .05 to be significant after applying Benjamini-Hochberg procedure to account for multiple comparisons where appropriate in the analyses.
To examine the neural correlates of gesture deficit at rest, we employed a ROI-to-ROI analysis. We entered age into the models as covariate of no interest, for age has been reported to influence gesture performance. We compared connectivity between the groups using a general linear model with group and age as regressors and contrasted T-statistics with healthy controls vs patients. We applied analysis-level false discovery rate (FDR)-correction. Second, we tested the association of gesture performance with connectivity values in the ROI-pairs with significant group differences applying a partial Spearman correlation with age as covariate. We conducted correlation analyses both within the whole sample and separately for each group.
To further examine effects of altered connectivity, we correlated FAB, TONI, AIMS, BFCRS, 5 factors of the PANSS, hallucination, and ego-disturbances according to CASH-present with connectivity in the ROI-pairs with significant group differences, applying partial Spearman correlation with age as covariate.