Title.
Higher Social Rejection Sensitivity in Opioid-Dependent Patients Is Related to Smaller Insula Gray Matter Volume: A Voxel-Based Morphometric Study.
Abstract.
Abstract.
Opioid-dependent patients are highly sensitized to negative social feedback, and increased social rejection sensitivity was linked to adverse treatment outcome, but its neurobiological underpinnings have not been understood yet. The present study investigated gray matter (GM) volume differences between 19 opioid maintenance treatment (OMT) patients and 20 healthy controls using magnetic resonance imaging and voxel-based morphometry. Associations of GM volumes with subjective feelings of exclusion and inclusion during a social ostracism (Cyberball) paradigm, with rejection sensitivity, social interaction anxiety and social phobia were explored. OMT patients displayed smaller GM volume in the bilateral insula and inferior frontal gyri. Psychometric and task data showed that patients reported significantly higher rejection sensitivity, social anxiety and social phobia scores and felt more excluded and less included during the social ostracism paradigm. Smaller GM volume in the insula was associated with higher subjective exclusion, lower subjective inclusion and higher rejection sensitivity, social anxiety and social phobia scores. Findings indicate that structural deficits in emotion- and anxiety-processing brain regions in OMT patients are associated with increased social rejection sensitivity. As social rejection is a potential trigger for relapse, patients might benefit from therapeutic strategies that promote social integration.
Introduction.
Opioid dependence is a chronic disease that is associated with social and physical impairments. Aside from cognitive dysfunction, opioid dependence is associated with changes in emotion processing and higher rates of depressive symptoms. The underpinnings of those alterations are not fully understood, but studies indicate that, in part, constant negative social feedback might shape emotionality in patients toward a negative affective state and a higher rejection sensitivity. Studies have shown that peer rejection contributes to latter social rejection sensitivity and increased social anxiety and withdrawal. Further studies confirmed the association between social rejection sensitivity and social anxiety. Importantly, negative social interaction and poor social support are associated with negative treatment outcome in opioid-dependent patients. Attention has been drawn to the relevance of social context in addictive disorders with the insula being implicated as a key hub processing social inclusion and exclusion and drug craving. Neuroimaging studies have identified structural deficits in patients on opioid maintenance therapy (OMT) in the insula and other areas associated with cognitive performance, emotion processing and social perception: Previous anatomical studies reported smaller gray matter (GM) volume in opioid-dependent patients in the bilateral insular gyrus; areas of the frontal lobe, such as the bilateral prefrontal cortex, inferior frontal cortex, and supplementary motor cortex; areas of the temporal lobe and thalamus; and right cerebellum. It was hypothesized that these structural abnormalities result in behavioral and neuropsychological impairments. However, there is still little evidence on the association between structural changes and behavioral correlates. The study by) investigated associations between GM volume changes and cognitive performance, as well as depressive symptoms and anxiety: While OMT patients showed little to no impairments with regard to memory performance, executive function and visual construction skills, significantly higher depression and anxiety scores were found that showed significant associations to smaller volume in the prefrontal cortex, cingulate, cerebellum and insula. It has been suggested that heroin-induced changes in regional cerebral blood flow with a resulting reduced perfusion of brain regions, in addition to an altered brain metabolism, might be the underlying cause for structural abnormalities in opioid-dependent patients. In addition, the duration of heroin use has been suggested to be a critical factor for the extent of brain damage. However, the impact of structural abnormalities on social perception remains to be elucidated.
The present analyses were performed on a dataset that was collected within the framework of a larger study that used psychometric assessment tools, an funtional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) social ostracism Cyberball task and structural MRI to investigate functional and structural brain correlates of social interaction and social rejection. The results of the social rejection functional correlates are reported in detail elsewhere. In short, results showed that patients on OMT felt less included and more excluded during fMRI Cyberball inclusion and control conditions and equally excluded during the social exclusion Cyberball condition. Furthermore, patients showed reduced pain sensitivity, but subjective pain was higher after social exclusion compared to social inclusion trials. When contrasting social exclusion and inclusion trials, healthy participants displayed significant activation in brain areas related to social feedback and emotion processing, whereas OMT patients showed no difference across conditions probably due to direct pharmacological inhibitory effects of the opioids.
Incremental to the previous publication, here we report data on the structural correlates of social anxiety and social rejection sensitivity. We investigated differences in GM volume between opioid-dependent patients and controls and their associations with social rejection sensitivity, social interaction anxiety and social phobia using structural MRI and voxel-based morphometry (VBM).
Hypotheses.
Firstly, based on previous findings, we hypothesized that OMT patients would show smaller GM volume in frontal cortical and subcortical areas, including the insula cortex.
Secondly, we hypothesized that patients on OMT show higher dispositional social rejection sensitivity, social phobia symptoms and social anxiety symptoms, when measured using established psychometric scales.
Thirdly, based on previous findings that demonstrated negative associations between GM volume in the limbic system, specifically the insula, and symptoms of social anxiety and depression, we hypothesize that GM volume in the limbic system correlates negatively with social rejection sensitivity, social phobia and social anxiety scores.
Materials and methods.
Participants.
Opioid-dependent patients were recruited in an outpatient opioid maintenance program of the Central Institute of Mental Health in Mannheim, Germany. The healthy control group consisted of volunteers that were recruited from newspaper and clinic homepage advertisement. The study was approved by the local ethics committee of the University of Heidelberg and performed in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki, and informed written consent was obtained. All participants were required to be aged between 18 and 65 years. Opioid-dependent patients had to meet the diagnosis of opioid dependence according to the ICD10. Healthy participants were included only if no indication of substance abuse disorder or another mental illness was found during an interview with an experienced clinical psychiatrist. Exclusion criteria for both groups were: (i) substance use disorder other than nicotine (only for healthy controls), (ii) pregnancy, (iii) severe internal or neurological condition and (iv) contraindications for MRI scanning (e.g. tattoos, metal implants, pregnancy, pacemakers). A total of 25 patients and 22 healthy controls were included in the current study. 19 patients (18 males and 1 female) and 20 controls (18 males and 2 females) provided complete VBM datasets of sufficient quality. Patients did not undergo a formal screening for comorbid psychiatric disorders prior to being included in the current study; however, all patients were interviewed by two independent professional psychiatrists at the institute, in order to rule out relevant comorbid psychiatric diseases. In addition, patients were treated at the department’s opioid maintenance unit for several years with regular appointments with a specialized psychiatrist once a week and no clinical evidence for a comorbid psychiatric disorder. Patients were all HIV negative, but four were tested positive for hepatitis C virus (HCV) antibodies. Fourteen patients were treated with methadone and n = 5 with buprenorphine, the mean methadone equivalence dose was 63.35 mg/d (± 36.26 mg/d standard deviation (s.d.)). Further clinical and social characteristics are displayed in Table 1. At the time of scanning, urine sampling was conducted to detect other (non-prescribed) psychoactive substances (see Table 1), and 9 out of 19 patients reported to use substances other than the prescribed opioid (methadone or buprenorphine), such as benzodiazepines, cocaine, alcohol or cannabis.
Study design.
Eligible participants were asked to complete several questionnaires before performing magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) with structural and functional scans. The psychometric measures included the social phobia scale (SPS), the social interaction anxiety scale (SIAS), the rejection sensitivity questionnaire (RSQ) and the brief symptom inventory (BSI). All participants underwent structural MRI scanning and performed an fMRI Cyberball task that simulates social inclusion and social exclusion while applying painful and neutral reference temperature stimuli as used in previous studies.
MRI acquisition.
High-resolution anatomical scans using a T1-weighted 3D magnetization-prepared rapid acquisition gradient-echo seq-uence (1 × 1 × 1 mm3 voxel size, slice thickness 1 mm, Field of view (FOV) 256 × 256 mm, Repetition Time (TR) = 2300 ms, Echo Time (TE) = 3.03 ms, Inversion Time (TI) = 900 ms) were performed using a 3 T whole-body tomograph (MAGNETOM Trio, Siemens Medical Systems, Erlangen, Germany).
VBM pre-processing and statistical analyses.
All image analyses of structural data were conducted using the latest version of the statistical parametric mapping software (SPM) for Matlab (version 12, Wellcome Department of Cognitive Neurology, London, UK). Current methodological studies indicated that the Computational Anatomy Toolbox (CAT12, http://www.neuro.uni-jena.de/cat/index.html) for SPM12 provides a more accurate volumetric analysis of brain regions and is more robust and accurate against volumetric alterations than the VBM8 toolbox. Considering these findings, we performed our VBM analyses using the CAT12 toolbox for SPM12, applying the default settings and proceeding according to the authors’ manual. Before image analyses, all image datasets were inspected by at least one medical technical radiology assistant to check for any gross structural abnormalities or imaging artifacts and referred to a neuroradiologist if necessary. All 3D T1-weighted MRI scans were normalized using an affine registration followed by non-linear registration, corrected for bias field inhomogeneity and then segmented into GM, white matter (WM) and cerebrospinal fluid components. We used the Diffeomorphic Anatomic Registration Through Exponentiated Lie (DARTEL) algebra algorithm to normalize the segmented scans into a standard Montreal Neurological Institute (MNI) space. Compared to the conventional algorithm, the DARTEL approach provides more precise spatial normalization to the template than standard registration methods. Following this step, images were visually inspected for sample homogeneity of the unsmoothed data. This was evaluated using the procedure included in the CAT12 toolbox. Mahalanobis distance, combining the mean correlation and weighted overall image quality were inspected and outliers (>2 standard deviations) excluded from further analyses (n = 3). The remaining segmented, modulated and normalized datasets were smoothed using an 8 mm full-width half-maximum Gaussian smoothing kernel and then fed into second-level two-sample t-test analyses, considering total intracranial volume (TIV) and age as covariates. In order to control for multiple comparisons, a combined cluster-extent and voxel-wise threshold, corresponding to a family-wise error (FWE) rate of pFWE <0.05, was determined using the AlphaSim module of the NeuroElf toolbox (www.neuroelf.net) for Matlab. For a pre-set voxel-wise threshold of P < 0.001, the AlphaSim procedure determined a cluster-extent threshold of 103 voxels (10.000 Monte Carlo simulations, smoothing kernel of x = 8 mm, y = 8 mm, z = 8 mm). In order to follow up on the results of the whole-brain analyses, standardized anatomical masks were used to extract GM volume data from the respective brain regions that showed significant group effects (contrast: healthy participants > OMT patients). The masks that defined the regions of interest (ROI) were derived from the Hammers brain atlas. Specifically, GM volume data were extracted from the (i) left insula [BA13], (ii) right insula [BA13], (iii) left inferior frontal gyrus [BA47] and (iv) right inferior frontal gyrus [BA47] using the standard procedure of the CAT12 toolbox for GM volume data extraction from ROIs. Data were imported into SPSS version 24.0 for further correlation analyses (SPSS, IBM Corp., Somers, NY, USA).
Statistical analyses.
Demographical data and psychometric scales were analyzed using SPSS 24.0 and by applying two-sample t-tests and chi-squared tests. Group differences in GM volume were analyzed using two-sample t-tests correcting for TIV and age. Results are depicted in Table 1. Associations between GM volume in areas that displayed significant whole-brain differences in two-sample t-tests between opioid-dependent patients and healthy participants (i.e. bilateral insula and right inferior frontal gyrus) and psychometric scales covering social anxiety and rejection sensitivity (SIAS, RSQ, SPS) and Cyberball task-related changes in feelings of being excluded or included were investigated using partial correlation analyses, controlling for age and TIV (because both were related to GM volume variability in previous studies). Prior, exploratory data analyses were conducted to identify potential outliers. One patient had low values on the variable encoding left insula GM volume (>1.5× interquartile range). As the inspection of the raw imaging data and pre-processing quality indices indicated good quality of the anatomical data, we considered this value to reflect the true value of the participant and opted to include that participant in the correlation analyses. Partial correlations between (i) psychometric scales and (ii) subjective ratings of inclusion and exclusion during the Cyberball task inclusion condition and GM volume were corrected for multiple comparisons [i.e. (i) four independent partial correlations per brain area, left insula, right insula, inferior frontal gyrus, (ii) two independent partial correlations per brain area] using the Benjamini and Hochberg procedure as implemented in the Matlab ‘mafdr’ function.